EBIOM-01064; No of Pages 15
EBioMedicine xxx (2017) xxx–xxx
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
EBioMedicine
j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e b i o m e d i c i n e . c o m
Research Paper
Tenomodulin is Required for Tendon Endurance Running and Collagen I Fibril
Adaptation to Mechanical Load
Sarah Dex a, Paolo Alberton a, Lena Willkomm b, Thomas Söllradl c, Sandra Bago c, Stefan Milz d,
Mehdi Shakibaei d, Anita Ignatius e, Wilhelm Bloch b, Hauke Clausen-Schaumann c, Chisa Shukunami f,
Matthias Schieker a,g, Denitsa Docheva a,h,⁎
a Experimental Surgery and Regenerative Medicine, Department of Surgery, Ludwig-Maximilians-University (LMU), 80336 Munich, Germany
b Department of Molecular and Cellular Sports Medicine, German Sport University, 50933 Cologne, Germany
c Center for Applied Tissue Engineering and Regenerative Medicine – CANTER, University of Applied Sciences, 80335 Munich, Germany
d Department of Anatomy, Ludwig-Maximilian University (LMU), 80336 Munich, Germany
e Institute of Orthopaedic Research and Biomechanics, University of Ulm, 89081 Ulm, Germany
f Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Division of Basic Life Sciences, Institute of Biomedical & Health Sciences, Hiroshima University, 734-8553 Hiroshima, Japan
g Novartis Institute for Biomedical Research (NIBR), Translational Medicine Musculoskeletal Disease, 4056 Basel, Switzerland
h Experimental Trauma Surgery, Department of Trauma Surgery, University Regensburg Medical Centre, 93053 Regensburg, Germany
a r t i c l e
i n f o
a b s t r a c t
Article history:
Received 21 February 2017
Received in revised form 3 May 2017
Accepted 3 May 2017
Available online xxxx
Keywords:
Tendons
Tenomodulin
Knockout mouse model
Running tests
Atomic force microscopy
Collagen I crosslinking
Tendons are dense connective tissues that attach muscles to bone with an indispensable role in locomotion
because of their intrinsic properties of storing and releasing muscle- generated elastic energy. Tenomodulin
(Tnmd) is a well-accepted gene marker for the mature tendon/ligament lineage and its loss-of -function in
mice leads to a phenotype with distinct signs of premature aging on tissue and stem/progenitor cell levels.
Based on these ﬁndings, we hypothesized that Tnmd might be an important factor in the functional performance
of tendons. Firstly, we revealed that Tnmd is a mechanosensitive gene and that the C-terminus of the protein co-
localize with collagen I-type ﬁbers in the extracellular matrix. Secondly, using an endurance training protocol, we
compared Tnmd knockout mice with wild types and showed that Tnmd deﬁciency leads to signiﬁcantly inferior
running performance that further worsens with training. In these mice, endurance running was hindered due to
abnormal response of collagen I cross-linking and proteoglycan genes leading to an inadequate collagen I ﬁber
thickness and elasticity. In sum, our study demonstrates that Tnmd is required for proper tendon tissue adaptation
to endurance running and aids in better understanding of the structural-functional relationships of tendon tissues.
© 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
1. Introduction
Tendon biology is under-investigated, yet tendon pathologies are a
big burden for affected patients. The poor regenerative ability of tendon
tissues (Benjamin and Ralphs, 1997) and unsuccessful surgical attempts
to repair tendon tears (Pennisi, 2002) underline the need to develop
superior therapies. Identifying key molecular markers would aid in
deﬁning the response to therapy (Morse and Gillies, 2010).
Tenomodulin (TNMD/Tnmd) is an established gene marker for the
mature tendon/ligament lineage in vertebrates (Docheva et al., 2005).
⁎ Corresponding author at: Experimental Trauma Surgery, Department of Trauma
Surgery, University Regensburg Medical Centre, Franz-Josef-Strauss-Allee 11, 93053
Regensburg, Germany.
E-mail address: denitsa.docheva@ukr.de (D. Docheva).
So far, limited studies have focused on deciphering its functions in ten-
don tissues and residing cells (Dex et al., 2016). The gene is abundantly
expressed in tendons and ligaments (Brandau et al., 2001; Shukunami
et al., 2001; Docheva et al., 2005). Its protein has a highly conserved
cleavable C-terminal cysteine-rich domain (Brandau et al., 2001;
Shukunami et al., 2001) that has been identiﬁed as an important regula-
tor for tendon stem/progenitor cell (TSPC) proliferation and senescence
as well as for tendon maturation (Alberton et al., 2015, and reviewed by
Dex et al., 2016). A variety of tissues express Tnmd mRNA, however
Tnmd cleavage and secretion is exclusive to tissues undergoing tension,
suggestive of a possible mechano-regulation. The cleaved form is
detected in the extracellular matrix (ECM) of mouse Achilles tendons
(Docheva et al., 2005) and human chordae tendineae cordis (Kimura
et al., 2008), but not in the eye (Oshima et al., 2003). Loss of Tnmd tran-
scripts in cultivated human periodontal ligament cells, tenocytes (Itaya
et al., 2009; Mazzocca et al., 2011) and in rat tendon ﬁbroblasts has been
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2017.05.003
2352-3964/© 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Please cite this article as: Dex, S., et al., Tenomodulin is Required for Tendon Endurance Running and Collagen I Fibril Adaptation to Mechanical
Load, EBioMedicine (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2017.05.003
2
S. Dex et al. / EBioMedicine xxx (2017) xxx–xxx
reported (Jelinsky et al., 2010), suggesting its downregulation is a
consequence of the lack of mechanical stimuli in vitro.
Through a multidisciplinary approach, we aimed to reveal further
features and functions of Tnmd in tendon tissue. First, we tested whether
Tnmd gene promotor activity and transcription are responsive to in vitro
mechanical stretching, which was followed by subjecting wildtype
(WT) and Tnmd knockout (KO) mice to forced endurance and voluntary
running protocols. We performed an ultrastructural analysis using
atomic force microscopy (AFM) technology and investigated collagen I
ﬁber topography, diameter distribution, average diameter, and average
stiffness from sedentary and trained Achilles tendons. Lastly, we studied
the localization of TNMD protein in human tendon and TSPC specimens
and examined the effect of Tnmd loss-of-function on the expression of
collagen I cross-linking genes.
In sum, we report that TNMD/Tnmd is a mechanosensitive gene vital
for optimal running performance, proper tendon adaptation to running
and maintenance of structurally and functionally integral collagen
ﬁbrils.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Cell Culture
Human Achilles tendon TSPC (3 young healthy donors) were previ-
ously isolated (under grant No.: 166-08 of the Ethical Commission of the
Medical Faculty of the LMU), and validated to possess multipotential
differentiation capacity, self-renewability and clonogenicity, and to ex-
press stem cell-, and tendon related gene markers (Kohler et al., 2013;
Popov et al., 2015). TSPC were cultured as described in (Kohler et al.,
2013; Popov et al., 2015). Cells in passages 1–3 were used for
experiments.
2.2. Mouse Strain
The Tnmd KO mouse line was established by Docheva et al. (2005).
Mouse husbandry, handling and euthanasia were strictly carried out
according to the guidelines of the Bavarian authorities. Animals were
euthanized with CO2 and dissected for collection of whole foot and
tendon tissues.
2.3. Semiquantitative and Quantitative PCR
Tota l RNA from human TSPC was iso lated w ith Q iagen RNeasy
Mini kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) and used for standard semiquan-
t itat ive PCR (protoco l in Supp . Info .) . Tota l RNA/cDNA from WT
and Tnmd KO tendons (pool of three animals) was prepared from lit-
termates subjected or not to the forced endurance running protocol.
Quant itat ive PCR o f co l lagen I regu latory and cross- l ink ing genes
(asporin, biglycan, decorin, ﬁbromodulin, ﬁbronectin, lysyl hydroxy-
lase , lysy l oxidase and lum ican) was performed us ing Rea lT ime
Ready Custom Pane l 96 – 32 + plates (https ://conﬁgurator .
realtimeready.roche.com) according to the manufacturer's instruc-
tions (Roche , Penzberg , Germany) . Br ieﬂy , PCR react ions were
pipetted on ice and each well contained 10 μl LightCycler 480 probes
master m ix , 0 ,2 μl cDNA (diluted 1:5) and 9 ,8 μl PCR grade water .
Plates were subsequently sealed and centrifuged down for 15 s . at
2100 rpm. Crossing points for each sample were determined by the
second der ivat ive max imum method and relat ive quant iﬁcat ion
was performed using the comparative ΔΔCt method according to
the manufacturer 's protocol . Four PCR independent repeats were
carried out (n = 4).
2.4. Western Blot Analysis
Biopsies from cadaveric human tissue complex gastrocnemius muscle-
Achilles tendon-calcaneus (from donors donated to the Department of
Anatomy, LMU in Munich) as well as mouse tendons from WT and
Tnmd KO animals were lysed with 8 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl [pH 8.0],
1 mM dithiothreitol, 1 mM EDTA). Protein (25 μg) aliquots were loaded
on a 15% SDS- polyacrylamide gel and transferred to Hybond-P membrane
(Amersham, GE Healthcare, Waukesha, USA). The membranes were pre-
incubated for 4 h at 4 °C in blocking buffer and probed with rabbit poly-
clonal anti-C-terminal Tnmd antibody, raised against a synthetic polypep-
tide conforming to amino acids 245 to 252 in mouse and human Tnmd
(Docheva et al., 2005). A mouse anti-beta-actin antibody cross-reacting
with mouse and human beta-actin (Abcam, Cambridge, United Kingdom)
was used as a loading control. Following overnight incubation at 4 °C,
membranes were probed with corresponding HRP-conjugated secondary
antibodies (Amersham). Protein bands were visualized using an enhanced
chemiluminescence system (ECL Plus, Amersham) and ﬁlm paper.
Western blotting was replicated independently three times (n = 3).
2.5. Immunoﬂuorescence
Human biopsies from Achilles tendon (grant No.: 166-08) as well as
mouse whole foot were embedded in parafﬁn and cut in 6 μm thick lon-
gitudinal sections. Prior to staining, slides were deparafﬁnated with
xylol and rehydrated via ethanol (100–50% EtOH). For antigen retrieval,
sections were treated with 0,2% hyaluronidase for 30 min. Following
blocking with 1% BSA/PBS for 2 h sections were incubated overnight at
4 °C with primary antibodies against asporin, ﬁbromodulin, lysyl
oxidase (All Abcam), lumican (Santa Cruz, Dallas, USA) and Tnmd
(Docheva et al., 2005). Corresponding Alexa Fluor 488-labeled second-
ary antibodies and nuclear dye 4′, 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI)
(both Life technology, Carlsbad, USA) were applied at room tempera-
ture for 1 h and 5 min, respectively. Photomicrographs were taken
with an Axiocam MRm camera on Observer Z1 microscope (Carl Zeiss,
Oberkochen, Germany). Confocal photomicrographs of Tnmd staining
in human and mouse Achilles tendon were taken using a confocal
Leica TSC SP2 microscope (Leica, Wetzlar, Germany). Immunoﬂuores-
cence experiments were repeated thrice independently.
2.6. Mechanical Stimulation
TSPC underwent axial cyclic strain in a six-station stimulation appa-
ratus driven by an eccentric motor as described previously (Popov et al.,
2015). For this, 1 × 105 TSPC were cultured for 4 days on FBS-coated
ﬂexible silicone dishes (60 mm × 30 mm). Triplicates were then
stretched 60 min/day in the long axis at a frequency of 1 Hz and a mag-
nitude of 5% for 3 consecutive days. In parallel, non-stimulated cells
were used as controls on day 3. Directly after stimulation, cells were
lysed for mRNA isolation as described above. Mechanical stimulation
was performed with 2 different TSPC donors (n = 2) (each in tripli-
cates) and repeated twice independently.
2.7. Luciferase Assay
The assay was performed as previously described by us (Alberton et
al., 2012). In brief, human TSPC (3 × 104 cells/cm2) were transfected
with 2,5 μg control promoter-less and Tnmd promoter-luciferase plas-
mids using OptiMEM media and Lipofectamine 2000 kit (Invitrogen).
After 6 h, transfection media was replaced with complete growth
media, and TSPC were cultured for 2 days. Luciferase activity was then
measured with the Luciferase Assay E4030 kit (Promega, Madison,
USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Cells were lysed in
1 × lysis buffer, 20 μl of the cell lysates were mixed with 100 μl luciferase
reagent and immediately measured on Saﬁre II Luminometer (TECAN,
Männedorf, Germany). Two transfected TSPC donors were used for
two independent mechanical stimulations (n = 4).
Please cite this article as: Dex, S., et al., Tenomodulin is Required for Tendon Endurance Running and Collagen I Fibril Adaptation to Mechanical
Load, EBioMedicine (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2017.05.003
S. Dex et al. / EBioMedicine xxx (2017) xxx–xxx
3
2.8. Forced Endurance Training
Forced endurance exercise training with adult Tnmd KO and WT
male mice (6 animals per genotype, n = 6) was carried out. Training
and testing was performed according to the guidelines of the animal
authority of North Rhine Westphalia. Mice were allowed to accom-
modate 1 week to the new environment and to the treadmill. Tests
started once the an imals were ab le to run w ithout any externa l
stimulus. The treadmill (Exer3/6; Columbus Instruments, Columbus,
USA) endurance training protocol consisted of a 60 min treadmill
exercise, 5 days a week, at a constant speed of 10 m/min and angle
of − 10°, which was selected in order to increase the tendon loading
during the training. The speed for the training session was sustained
by the mice for the daily hourly training session. The training lasted 4
consecut ive weeks . A pre- and post-training exhaustive test took
place, one day before the ﬁrst day of training and one day after the
last day of tra in ing , respect ively . In these exhaust ive tests , m ice
were placed to run from 12 m/min with an increasing velocity (ΔV)
of 2 m/min every 3 m in, until volitional exhaustion. Running time
and velocity were recorded for each mouse until they were not able
to run anymore and fell off the treadmill. Littermates of 6 animals
per genotype , not subjected to training , were used as a sedentary
control group . M ice were randomly al located to either trained or
sedentary conditions. For the complete experimental period, mice
were fed ad libitum. Lastly, animals were authanized and legs excised
and processed for further analysis.
2.9. Pulmonary Capacity Measurements
Each animal from both genotypes was analyzed, prior and post train-
ing, for maximal lung volume in an Oxymax Economy System chamber
(Columbus Instruments, Columbus, USA). Experiments were performed
in the Department of Prof. W. Bloch.
2.10. Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM)
AFM was performed on Achilles tendon sections from sedentary
and tra ined Tnmd KO and WT m ice . Measurements were taken
with NanoWizard AFM instrument (JPK Instruments, Berlin, Germa-
ny) mounted on an inverted opt ica l m icroscope (Ax iovert 200 ,
Ze iss) accord ing to (Kamper et a l . , 2016 ; Pre in et a l . , 2016) w ith
s l ight mod iﬁcat ions . To ident i fy and ensure comparab le reg ions
between the groups, every 10th slide was analyzed by H&E staining
and consecutive slides were taken for AFM. The optical microscope
w ith a 40 × magn iﬁcat ion was used to guarantee the correct
pos it ioning of the cant i lever t ip onto the tendon co l lagen ﬁbers .
The AFM had a maximum horizontal scanning range of 100 × 100
μm2 and a vertical range of 15 μm. For AFM imaging and indentation
measurements , s ilicon nitride cantilevers (MLCT , Microcantilever ,
Bruker , Mannhe im) with a nom ina l spring constant o f 0 .01 N/m
and integrated pyramidal tips with a nominal radius b 20 nm were
used. Prior to each measurement, the force constants of cantilevers
were determ ined ind iv idua l ly us ing the therma l no ise method
described in Butt and Jaschke (1995). The collected data were eval-
uated with the JPK Data process ing so ftware 4 .0 .23 ( JPK instru-
ments) . For AFM imag ing and co l lagen d iameter ana lys is the
following algorithm was used: 1) polynomial ﬁt for each line of the
scan , to correct for a ﬂat beve led under lying sur face ; 2) low pass
ﬁlter (Gaussian); 3) high pass ﬁlter, to enhance the geometrical out-
line; and 4) edge detection, to determine the diameter of the indi-
vidual ﬁbrils.
Elasticity recording and calculation of Young's Modulus was based
on AFM-collected force indentation curves. Prior to each ﬁt the following
operations were applied: 1) conversion of the detector deﬂection signal
into a force; 2) baseline subtraction: the last 10% of the force-distance
curves were used to calculate the baseline and was subtracted from
the force signal; 3) contact point determination: the point in which
the force curve crosses zero is set as the x-axis zero; 4) calculation of
tip sample separation: the height signal is corrected for the deﬂection
of the cantilever.
AFM imaging and force mapping was performed with two tendons
per group. Intact ﬁbrils were randomly chosen from three different sec-
tions/animal. A total of 60 ﬁbrils per animal were measured for diameter
size and Gaussian distribution analysis (75–100 data points are
sufﬁcient), whilst 110 force curves were analyzed for Young's Modulus
analysis.
2.11. Immunogold Labelling (Post Embedding Technique) and Electron
Microscopy
Tendon tissue biopsies and TSPC were ﬁxed in 3% paraformaldehyde
for 1 h, washed overnight in PBS/BSA, dehydrated in ascending series
with ethanol and embedded in LR-white (London Resin, Plano,
Marburg, Germany). Ultrathin sections were prepared on nickel grids,
pre-treated with hyaluronidase (1 mg/ml) for 10 min, washed and incu-
bated with 1% BSA in 0,01 M PBS, pH 7,9 and 0,5% Tween for 10 min.
Subsequently, sections were incubated with primary antibodies
(Tnmd (Docheva et al., 2005), collagen I and decorin, 1:50 in BSA/PBS)
overnight at 4 °C and washed with 1% BSA in PBS for 15 min. Secondary
antibodies conjugated with 10 nm gold particles (diluted 1:30 in PBS/
BSA) were applied for 1 h. After rinsing for 2 × 5 min and ﬁxation
with 1% glutaraldehyde, sections were contrasted with tannic acid 1%/
20 min, osmium 1%/10 min and uranyl acetate 2%/30 min. Finally,
sections were rinsed and examined under transmission electron micro-
scope (Zeiss EM10, Germany).
2.12. Statistical Analysis
Quantitative data and statistical signiﬁcance was analyzed with
GraphPad Prism5 software (GraphPad). Unless otherwise speciﬁed, all
quantitative data were acquired from at least three independent
experiments. Bar charts show mean values and standard deviations.
Statistical difference was tested with one-way ANOVA (multigroup) or
with unpaired Student's t-test (two groups). In multiple comparisons,
one-way ANOVA was followed by Bonferroni post-hoc correct ion .
p-Value of 0.05 was considered statistically signiﬁcant and indicated
in ﬁgures as *p b 0.05, **p b 0.005 and ***p b 0.0005.
3. Results
3.1. Tnmd is a Mechanosensitive Gene
Tnmd is a gene abundantly expressed in tendons and ligaments
(Brandau et al., 2001; Shukunami et al., 2001; Docheva et al., 2005).
The protein has a highly conserved cleavable C-terminal cysteine-rich
domain (Brandau et al., 2001; Shukunami et al., 2001) identiﬁed as an
important regulator for TSPC proliferation and senescence as well as
for tendon maturation (Alberton et al., 2015 and reviewed in Dex et
al., 2016). Western blot analysis of human musculoskeletal elements
identiﬁed the expression of Tnmd C-terminal domain predominantly
in tendons at approximately 16 kD (Fig. 1a), as shown previously by
us and others (Docheva et al., 2005; Kimura et al., 2008). Immunoﬂuo-
rescent stainings localized the Tnmd protein in the ECM of human and
WT mouse Achilles tendon sections (Fig. 1b) as well as in human
ﬁbrocartilage, but not in hyaline cartilage (Supplementary Fig. 1).
Tnmd transcripts were abundant in human tendon total mRNA extracts,
but in vitro culturing of previously characterized human TSPC (Kohler et
al., 2013; Popov et al., 2015) led to a rapid loss of Tnmd mRNA (Fig. 1c).
Interestingly, upon 5% axial cyclic strain, the Tnmd promoter was
strongly activated and expression signiﬁcantly upregulated as validated
by luciferase assay and semi-quantitative PCR (Fig. 1d and e).
Please cite this article as: Dex, S., et al., Tenomodulin is Required for Tendon Endurance Running and Collagen I Fibril Adaptation to Mechanical
Load, EBioMedicine (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2017.05.003
4
S. Dex et al. / EBioMedicine xxx (2017) xxx–xxx
Fig. 1. Tnmd expression in human musculoskeletal elements and mechano-regulation. (a) Representative western blot with anti-C-terminal Tnmd antibody on human (tendon, MTJ
myotendinous junction, muscle and bone) and mouse (tendon) tissues. Detection of beta actin served as loading control. (b) Representative immunoﬂuorescent detection of Tnmd in
human and mouse Achilles tendons. Tnmd expression in green and nuclear DAPI in blue colour. Upper panel: low magniﬁcation epi-ﬂuorescence images; lower panel: confocal
microscopy. (c) Semi-quantitative PCR for Tnmd expression in cultured human TSPC (passage 0 and 3). The house-keeping gene GAPDH was used for normalization. Western blotting,
staining and PCR were reproduced three times (n = 3). (d) Luciferase activity assays (expressed in RLU, relative light units) with human TSPC transfected with a promoter-less
(mock-luc) or Tnmd promoter (− 769/+84F Tnmd genomic fragment)-driven luciferase (pTnmd-luc) plasmids without or undergoing mechanical stimulation of 5% axial strain. Two
independent stimulations with two different donors were carried out (n = 4). (e) Semi-quantitative PCR bands and densitometric evaluation of Tnmd expression against GAPDH in
human TSPC (passage 3) prior and after mechanical stimulation (presented in fold change). Statistical signiﬁcance: ***p b 0.0005. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this
ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
In conclusion, the C-terminal domain of Tnmd protein is deposited
in the ECM of human and mouse Achilles tendons. Tnmd expression in
human TSPC rapidly diminishes in two- dimensional static culture, but
is restored upon axial stretching, indicating the mechanosensitivity of
the TNMD gene.
3.2. Tnmd is Required for Optimal Running Performance
Mice naturally cover large distances of over 5 km daily (Koteja et
al., 1999). To compare their running ability, WT and Tnmd KO mice
were subjected to a forced endurance running protocol depicted in
Fig . 2a . Even in the in it ia l exhaust ive tests , mutant m ice ran for
signiﬁcantly less time. With increasing speed of 12–18 m/min more
mutant mice dropped out earlier and none ran at 18 m/min (Fig. 2b
left and c left). The training regime of 10 m/min was based on 70%
of the average maximum velocity of both genotypes (Fig . 2b left) .
Moreover ,
in the post-exhaust ive tests , mutant m ice ran for
signiﬁcantly less time and were unable to run over 12 m/min with
70% (4 out of 6 Tnmd KO mice) failing at that speed (Fig. 2b left and
c) . Th is suggested that Tnmd KO tendons may experience fat igue
and if that is the case, training further worsens their performance.
In contrast, the beneﬁcial effects of training were clear in the control
animals where more mice were able to sustain speeds between 12
and 14 m/min . The observed drop at 18 m/m in may be re lated to
muscle ﬁber composition shift during endurance running . Supple-
mentary Fig. 2 depicts the stacked areas of the data points in Fig. 2c
and stack area ca lcu lat ion in percentage to the WT sedentary
an ima ls . Max imum speed reached was not di fferent between
genotypes nor affected by training (Fig. 2b right).
Endu rance pe r fo rmance i s mu l t i fac to r ia l and can reﬂec t the
s ta tus o f the muscu loske le ta l and pu lmona ry sy s tem . Fo r th is ,
muscu loske le ta l e lemen t s and foo t jo in t s we re h i s to log i ca l ly
examined (Supp lementary Fig . 3) and pulmonary capacity , which
is considered the “gold standard” when studying the cardiovascu-
la r , pu lmonary , and metabo l ic adap ta t ions to exe rc ise , (da ta no t
shown) we re measu red revea l ing no d i f fe rences . Mo rphome t r ic
evaluation of gastrocnemius myoﬁbre perimeter and area showed
reduced va lues in t ra ined Tnmd KO m ice (Supp lemen tary F ig . 4a
and b) . Furthermore , we not iced a spec iﬁc k ind of myopathy only
in t ra ined Tnmd KO an ima l s , name ly tubu la r agg rega tes (TA )
(Enge l e t a l . , 1970 ) , wh ich a re a typ i ca l memb ranou s s t ru c tu re s
or ig inat ing from the term ina l c isterns of the sarcop lasm ic ret icu-
lum (Morgan-Hughes , 1998; Pavlovicova et al . , 2003) . The screen-
ing and TA coun t ing o f u l t ra th in musc le sec t ions demons t ra ted
approximately 1% of TA per area in mutant myoﬁbers (Supplemen-
tary Fig . 4c , d and e) . Though their incidence is rare , they represent
Please cite this article as: Dex, S., et al., Tenomodulin is Required for Tendon Endurance Running and Collagen I Fibril Adaptation to Mechanical
Load, EBioMedicine (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2017.05.003
S. Dex et al. / EBioMedicine xxx (2017) xxx–xxx
5
Fig. 2. Tnmd KO and WT performance in endurance running tests. (a) Experimental setup of the forced endurance running experiments. Mice ran in a treadmill at an angle of − 10°.
Beneath is the timeline: a, 1 week of acclimatization, start exhaustive test, followed by 5 days training for 4 consecutive weeks and end exhaustive test. (b) Average running time (left
graph) and average of the maximum velocity (right graph) achieved by each group in the exhaustive tests. (c) Bar graphs present the success rate of both groups at each speed of 12–
18 m/min in the start (left) and end (right) exhaustive tests. Six animals per genotype (n = 6) were tested. Statistical signiﬁcance: *p b 0.05.
an important indicator of skeleta l musc le d isease assoc iated w ith
aging (Boncompagni et al . , 2012) .
The response to forced exerc ise a lso depends on the adapt ive
capab i l i ty and neu ra l sys tem o f the m ice ( Le rman e t a l . , 2002)
because phys ica l ac t iv i ty leve ls syne rg ize env i ronmenta l fac to rs
with genetic and biolog ical components (L ightfoot , 2011) . There-
fo re , we a lso exam ined the m ice by vo lun tary runn ing te s t s
(Supp lementary F ig . 5a and b) . Th is invest igat ion conﬁrmed that
even vo luntar i ly Tnmd KO m ice per formed in fer io r ly as reﬂec ted
by the ir runn ing t ime and d is tance covered (Supp lemen tary F ig .
5d , c and d) . The reg is te red tendency was no t s ign iﬁ can t due to
lower techn ica l measurement accuracy o f the runn ing whee l set-
up.
In sum, our results revealed that Tnmd KO mice are inferior runners
compared to WT littermates in endurance tests, hence demonstrating
that Tnmd is essential for the intrinsic properties of tendons allowing
optimal running performance.
3.3. Tnmd Regulates the Structural and Biomechanical Properties of Tendon
Collagen I Fibers and Their Response to Training
We utilized AFM technology to analyze collagen ﬁber diameter
d istr ibut ion and s t i f fness because it is the on ly too l that enab les
measurements of both parameters on the same tissue section . We
exam ined the co l lagen topog raphy , ave rage ﬁber d iame te r and
diameter distribution in WT and KO Achilles tendons from seden-
tary and t ra ined m ice by AFM . We found tha t co l lagen ﬁbr i ls o f
Tnmd KO tendons were less compact, more frayed and interrupted
by gaps (F ig . 3a) . Comparison o f ﬁbri l d iameters revea led s igniﬁ-
cant ly larger mean va lues in Tnmd KO tendons (245 ,1 nm ±
44 ,8 nm) and a wider Gaussian distribut ion compared to controls
(mean diameter of 179,3 nm ± 32,9 nm) with a narrower Gaussian
distribution (Fig. 3b and c). Thicker collagen ﬁbril phenotypes were
previously described in thrombospondin-2 (Kyriakides et al., 1998),
lumican (Chakravarti et al., 1998) and decorin KO mice (Zhang et al.,
2006). WT mice ﬁbril diameter ranged from 100 to 260 nm, whereas
sma l l ﬁb r i ls we re en t ire ly m iss ing in the Tnmd KO tendons and
the range sh i fted to 190–390 nm (Fig . 3b) . Interest ing ly , tra in ing
led to w iden ing o f the Gauss ian d istr ibut ion and to an increase
in ﬁbril thickness in WT tendon, but this latter response was absent
in the mu tants , and the Gauss ian d is tr ibu t ion became narrower
(Fig. 3b and c). Taking advantage of the AFM-based nano-indenta-
tion, we measured the elasticity of single collagen ﬁbers and calcu-
la ted average Young 's Modu lus (YM) (F ig . 3d) . He re , Tnmd
KO mice had signiﬁcantly stiffer collagen I ﬁbrils with YM of 511 ,5
± 148.5 kPa in the sedentary group, which was slightly reduced to
Please cite this article as: Dex, S., et al., Tenomodulin is Required for Tendon Endurance Running and Collagen I Fibril Adaptation to Mechanical
Load, EBioMedicine (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2017.05.003
6
S. Dex et al. / EBioMedicine xxx (2017) xxx–xxx
Fig. 3. Atomic force microscopy analysis on nano-topography, distribution of diameter size and elastic modulus of collagen I ﬁbrils in Achilles tendons of sedentary and trained WT and
Tnmd KO mice. (a) Representative AFM topographical images. Arrows: indicate collagen I ﬁbers, arrowheads: interﬁbrular matrix, asterisk: section artifacts. (b) Distribution of collagen
I ﬁbril diameter size; blue curves present Gaussian distribution. (c) Average collagen ﬁbril diameter (n = 60). (d) Calculation of mean Young's Moduli denoting the elastic properties
of collagen I ﬁbrils (n = 110). Bars represent mean ± standard deviation. Statistical signiﬁcance: ***p b 0.005. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the
reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
453 ,9 ± 136 ,7 kPa in the trained group . In contrast, sedentary WT
mice had softer collagen ﬁbri ls and responded more e fﬁc ient ly to
endurance exerc ise by fur the r increas ing the ir e last ic i ty by 47%
(trained group YM 192 ,3 ± 66 ,2 kPa vs sedentary group YM 362 ,6
± 148 ,5 kPa) . F ig . 3d fur the rmore revea ls that t ra in ing led to a
more homogenous tissue ultrastructure in WT tendons as reﬂected
by a lower standard deviation.
Thus, our data presents a striking collagen I phenotype of the Tnmd-
deﬁcient tendons; hereupon, we conclude that this gene is important
for regulating the lateral thickness and stiffness of single collagen I ﬁbers
and for proper ﬁber adaptation to exercise by modifying their width and
elasticity.
3.4. Tnmd is Required for Proper Collagen I Cross-linking
To explain this collagen-related phenomenon, we next investigated
the exact localization of TNMD by immuno-gold labelling with anti-
Tnmd C-terminal, collagen I and decorin antibodies together with elec-
tron microscopy imaging on Achilles tendon tissue (Fig. 4a) and TSPC
sections (4b).
High collagen I signals were observed directly in the bundles of
thick ECM ﬁbrils in tendon and TSPC sections . Further , gold-parti-
c les attached to decor in ant ibod ies were grouped in between the
mesh o f co l lagen ﬁbr i ls in a manne r d is t inc t ive for pro teog lycan
d istr ibut ion . F ig . 4a and b a lso revea led strong labe l l ing for Tnmd
in the ECM in both tendon sect ions and secreted by TSPC; its ep i-
tope was detected in small c lusters or singularly localized between
or along collagen ﬁbers , differing from the larger c lusters seen for
decor in . TNMD was a lso found on the cel l membrane in both ten-
don cells and TSPC in regions where collagen ﬁbers were attached
o r p ro t rud ing . Impo r tan t ly , no exp ress ion a long the naked ce l l
memb rane was v is ib le , sugge s t ive o f in t race l lu la r c leavage o f
TNMD , wh ich when sec re ted , depos i ts in the ECM in a ssoc ia t ion
with collagen I ﬁbrils .
Please cite this article as: Dex, S., et al., Tenomodulin is Required for Tendon Endurance Running and Collagen I Fibril Adaptation to Mechanical
Load, EBioMedicine (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2017.05.003
S. Dex et al. / EBioMedicine xxx (2017) xxx–xxx
7
Fig. 4. Tnmd localization in extracellular matrix and investigation of collagen I regulatory and cross-linking genes. Immunogold electron microscopy imaging of Achilles tendon (a) and
TSPC sections (b) with immunogold labelling for collagen I (Col I), decorin (Dcn) and C-terminal Tnmd antibodies. Black arrows point to sites of epitope expression in the extracellular
matrix (M) and arrowheads point to sites of epitope expression on tenocytes (T). (c) Quantitative PCR analysis for asporin (Asp), biglycan (Bgn), decorin (Dcn), ﬁbromodulin (Fmod),
ﬁbronectin (Fn1), lysyl hydroxylase (Llh), lysyl oxidase (Lox) and lumican (Lum) on total cDNA from sedentary and trained Tnmd KO and WT tendons. N = 4. Statistical signiﬁcance:
*p b 0.05 and **p b 0.005.
Lastly, we evaluated whether Tnmd affects collagen I ﬁbril regu-
la to ry p ro teog ly cans and c ross - l inke rs , by inves t iga t ing the
exp re ss ion o f aspo r in , b ig lycan , ﬁb romodu l in , deco r in , ly sy l hy -
d roxy lase and ly sy l ox idase gene s in seden tary and endu rance -
t ra ined tendons . Quan t i ta t ive PCR ident iﬁed h igh exp ress ion fo r
deco r in ; mode ra te fo r ﬁb romodu l in and b ig ly can ; and low fo r
lum ican , aspor in , lysy l ox idase , lysy l hydroxy lase and ﬁbronect in
(F ig . 4c ) . Lo s s o f Tnmd resu l ted in s ign iﬁ cant down regu la t ion o f
decorin , ﬁbromodul in , ﬁbronect in and lysy l ox idase mRNA leve ls .
Regarding adaptation to exerc ise, only genes that were signiﬁcant-
ly down regu la ted in re s t ing cond i t ions we re s ign iﬁ can t ly
up regu la ted in the mu tan t s a f te r t ra in ing . Th is was ma rked ly
different to WT mice, which responded by sign iﬁcantly upregulat-
ing only lysy l hydroxy lase , a pro-co llagen I cross- l inker (Yeowe l l
and Wa lker , 2000) . Intr igu ing ly , at the prote in leve l we detected
h ighe r leve ls o f ﬁbromodu l in , lum ican and lysy l ox idase in Tnmd
KO p r io r to exe rc ise ; howeve r , the i r p ro te in depos i t ion was
unchanged a f te r t ra in ing (Supp lemen ta ry F ig . 6) . On ly a spo r in
responded to exe rc ise by exh ib i t ing a mo re ﬁb r i l lary pa t te rn . In
cont rast , WT an ima ls had more pronounced lysy l ox idase s igna ls
in the ECM after running .
Taken together , our results suggest that TNMD/Tnmd is a
mechanosensitive gene important for tendon running performance,
proper adaptation to exercise and maintenance of structurally and
functionally integral collagen ﬁbers.
4. Discussion
Mechanical stimuli are important for development , homeosta-
s is and regene ra t ion o f muscu loske le ta l t issues such as bone
(Pa lomares e t a l . , 2009) , car t i lage (Khoshgo f tar et a l . , 2011) and
musc le (Cand ian i e t a l . , 2010) . Musc le - re s t r ic ted de le t ion o f
integr in- linked k inase , the downstream partner o f the mechano-
recep to r in teg r in β1 , leads to muscu la r dys t rophy a t the s i te
of myotend inous junc t ions , a phenotype that is further enhanced
by endu rance exe rc ise t ra in ing (Wang e t a l . , 2008 ) . Conve r se ly ,
m ice lacking decor in and undergo ing exerc ise are protected from
the onse t o f os teoa r th r i t is (G ronau e t a l . , 2017 ) . Me chan ica l
st imu lation was recognized as indispensab le for tendon deve lop-
men t and homeos tas is (Yang e t a l . , 2005 ; Ga l loway e t a l . , 2013) .
One recent study by Maeda et a l . , 2011 ind icated that in tendons
physical forces are translated into biochemica l signals via a signal-
ing loop between TGF-β3 growth factor-Smad 2/3 med iators and
Sc le rax is (Scx) t ransc r ip t iona l ac t iv i ty . In ano the r s tudy , i t was
d iscovered tha t Scx and Os te r ix antagon is t ica l ly regu la te tens i le
force-responsive remodeling of periodontal ligaments and alveolar
bone (Tak imo to e t a l . , 2015) . However , the exact invo lvement o f
o the r mechano -sens i t ive genes and the i r s igna l ing cascades in
tendon t issues rema ins la rge ly unknown and fu r the r e f fo r ts in
unde r s tand ing such pa thways a re fundamen ta l fo r imp rov ing
therapeutic strategies for tendinopathies .
We have previously described that Tnmd KO mice have a very mild
developmental phenotype, consisting of reduced tenocyte density and
increased collagen ﬁber diameter (Docheva et al., 2005). These data
suggested that Tnmd is not a master-switch gene, but rather a ﬁne-
tuner. For this reason, we decided to examine whether TNMD is a
mechanosensitive gene and to challenge control and KO animals by
endurance running.
Tendons are comprised of abundant ECM , mainly collagen I , and
low numbe r o f ce l l s (He ineme ie r and K jae r , 2011 ) . A sma l l
Please cite this article as: Dex, S., et al., Tenomodulin is Required for Tendon Endurance Running and Collagen I Fibril Adaptation to Mechanical
Load, EBioMedicine (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2017.05.003
8
S. Dex et al. / EBioMedicine xxx (2017) xxx–xxx
pe rcen tage o f these ce l l s a re TSPC , a d is t inc t ive ce l l popu la t ion
w ith common adu lt stem ce l l character ist ics suggested to modu-
la te tendon homeo s ta s i s (Popov e t a l . , 2015 ; B i e t a l . , 2007 ;
Kohler et al ., 2013) . Mechanical loading of TSPC at 4% cycl ic uniax-
ia l s t re tch s t imu la ted the i r pro l i fe ra t ion and d i f fe ren t ia t ion into
tenocy tes (Zhang and Wang , 2010) , p romo ted the produc t ion o f
co l lagen I , wh i l s t supp re s s ing inﬂamma to ry response s (Yang e t
a l . , 2005 ) . We have p rev ious ly shown tha t 8% b iax ia l - loaded
human TSPC respond by upregulation of mechano-sensitive genes
and produc t ion o f the p ro teog lycan s ﬁb romodu l in and lum ican
(Popov et al . , 2015) . Loss of Tnmd transcripts in cu ltivated human
periodontal ligament cells , tenocytes (Itaya et al . , 2009; Mazzocca
e t a l . , 2011 ) and in ra t tendon ﬁb rob la s t s ha s been shown
( Je l in sky e t a l . , 2010) . We sugge s t th is down regu la t ion re su l t s
from lack o f mechan ica l s t imu l i in v itro . Furthermore , a study on
the e f fec t o f re lease o f tens i le s t ra in on eng inee red human
tendon-constructs seeded with tendon ﬁbroblasts reported down-
regu lat ion o f TNMD express ion (Bayer et a l . , 2014) . In our s tudy ,
the PCR and luciferase data on control and mechanically stretched
human TSPC showed clearly that TNMD upregulates with mechan-
ical stretching . Interestingly , TSPC transduced with Tnmd promot-
e r , bu t no t unde rgo ing s t re tch ing had in c rea sed luc i fe rase
ac t iv i ty , wh ich we sugges t i s due to endogenous exp ress ion o f
ups t ream Tnmd regu la to rs in TSPC such as Scx (A lbe r ton e t a l . ,
2012) .
When subjec ted to exhaust ive tests and endurance runn ing
exerc ise Tnmd-deﬁcient m ice exhibited a s igniﬁcant ly d ifferent
performance phenotype , comprised of lower running time , earlier
runn ing test fa i lure and worsen ing of runn ing performance after
train ing reg ime . These results suggest that Tnmd is important for
opt imal runn ing performance . In order to exc lude s ide-e ffec ts of
Tnmd gene KO on mice running performance , we carried out gross
morpho log ica l assessment of muscu loske leta l e lements and foot
joints revealing no obvious differences between genotypes. Interest-
ingly , we detected a TA myopathy only in the trained KO animals ,
there fore at present we considered the onset of this pathology
secondary to the tendon functional maladaptation to running. The
in it ia l study of tenomodu l in by Brandau et al . , 2001 , suggested a
low messenger expression of Tnmd in the bra in , wh ich so far has
not been validated on the protein level. Still, to examine any poten-
tial neural side-effects , we performed voluntarily running tests
where the animals were not forced to run, and in these tests Tnmd
KO an ima ls showed wi l l ingness to run , suggest ing no profound
behav iora l d ifferences , but st i l l a tendency for infer ior runn ing .
Fo llow up investigations will be undertaken to further study the
Tnmd-re lated TA musc le phenotype as we l l as poss ib le e ffects of
Tnmd in the neural system.
Collagen I is the main determinant of tendon mechanical strength
and function. Our immunogold labelling imaging co-localized Tnmd to
collagen I ﬁbers in human Achilles tendon and TSPC sections. Strong la-
belling for TNMD was observed in the ECM in both tendon sections and
secreted by TSPC. Additionally, it was also found on the cell membrane
in both tendon cells and TSPC in regions where collagen ﬁbers were at-
tached or protruding. Importantly, no expression along the naked cell
membrane was visible, suggestive of intracellular cleavage of Tnmd,
with subsequent export and deposition in the ECM in close association
with collagen I ﬁbers.
Since Tnmd KO m ice harbor very mi ld deve lopmenta l changes ,
inc lud ing interest ing u ltras tructura l phenotype charac ter ized by
irregular and thicker collagen I ﬁbrils when examined by electron
microscopy (Docheva et al . , 2005) , we hypothesized possible struc-
tural and biomechanical alterat ions of the tendon tissue on nano-
leve l . To p inpo int such we imp l ica ted AFM topography and force
inden ta t ion ana lyses , a techno logy tha t has been large ly used in
ca r t i lage resea rch , demons t ra t ing so l id da ta on nano -s t ruc tu ra l
and -b iomechan ica l assessment o f car t i lage pa tho log ies (Gronau
et al ., 2017; Prein et al . , 2016; Stolz et al . , 2009) . AFM of collagen I
ﬁbers in sedentary and t ra ined Ach i l les tendons conﬁrmed these
p rev ious obse rva t ions and add i t iona l ly revea led tha t the ﬁbe rs
are s ign iﬁcan t ly s t i f fe r in the KO than in WT tendons . Mo reover ,
while ﬁber size increased and stiffness decreased with training in
control m ice , the KO tendons were non-respons ive . The ab il ity o f
tendons to s t re tch and reco i l is impo r tan t to save ene rgy du r ing
locomo t ion fo r e conom ic fo rce gene ra t ion (A lexande r , 1991 ) .
Howeve r , a t the same t ime they mus t no t unde rgo i r reve rs ib le
deformation. Physiologica l stretch ing of tendons in v ivo decreases
crimp numbers close to 50% in order to reduce the degree of ﬁbril
undu la t ion (F ranch i e t a l . , 2007 ) . Th is is mo re impo r tan t fo r
tendon s than mu sc le , s ince mu sc le can e longa te by a lmo s t 10%
wh i le in con trast the who le tendon un it can on ly lengthen by 3–
4% (E lsa lan ty e t a l . , 2007) . V i la r ta e t a l . , obse rved mo re a l igned
and intense ly packed ﬁbri ls in Ach il les tendons o f rats after exer-
c i se (V i lar ta and V ida l Bde , 1989) . S t i f fen ing o f human tendons
was obse rved in ag ing o r d iabe t ic ind iv idua ls due to inc reased
pa tho log ica l c ro ss - l ink ing o f co l lagen ﬁb r i ls (Shadw ick , 1990 ;
Couppe e t a l . 2016 ) . S t i f fne ss o f tendons va r ies w i th age , sex ,
phy s i ca l ac t iv i ty and fa t igue (Kubo e t a l . , 2001b ; Kubo e t a l . ,
2001a ; Kubo e t a l . , 2001c ; Reeves , 2006) . Interest ing ly , d i f fe ren t
types o f tendons modu la te the i r s t i f fness to each o the r , fo r
example in endurance running , tendons in the knee joints become
s t i f fe r and in p lan te r jo in ts so f te r to gua ran tee op t ima l runn ing
performance (Kubo et al . , 2015) . Supplementary Fig . 7 depicts the
exp lana t ion o f th is phenomenon . When sub jec ted to the same
amoun t o f mechan ica l load , s t i f fe r tendons ex tend le ss and in
tu rn s tore less energy . In con t ra s t , tendons tha t are more e las t ic
extend further , store more energy and can there fore prevent pre-
mature rupturing . In endurance training the tendon spring softens;
the so f te r the sp r ing , the mo re e las t ic po ten t ia l ene rgy can be
stored and less restoring force is needed resulting in more econom-
ic running.
A r ise in blood-ﬂow (Langberg et a l . , 1998) , col lagen-turnover
(Langbe rg e t a l . , 2000) , g lu cose up take (Hannuka inen e t a l . ,
2005) and a l te red regu la t ion o f ma t r ix me ta l lop ro tease s
(Ko sk inen e t a l . , 2004 ) a re de tec ted in tendons du r ing exe r c ise .
Tendons a lso adap t d i f fe ren t ly depend ing on the na tu re o f the
exe r c ise . Fo r examp le , Sven sson e t a l . (2016) u sed res i s tance
tra in ing protoco l (bu i ld ing up strength , anaerob ic endurance and
s ize of ske leta l musc les; invo lving fast-tw itch musc le ﬁbers) that
resu l ted in tendon s t i f fen ing . In con t ras t , Wood and Brooks
(2016) reported endurance runn ing ( involving slow-twitch ﬁbers)
led to more elastic tendon tissues in tendons of old mice , which is
in l ine w i th ou r resu l ts . Endu rance runn ing in humans leads to
so f ten ing o f Ach i l les tendons (Oo i e t a l . , 2015 ) and tendon s o f
young mice adjusted to treadmi ll running by alterations in collagen
ﬁbe r d iame te r , d i s t r ibu t ion , c ross - se c t iona l a rea and numbe r
(M ichna , 1984 ; M ichna and Ha r tmann , 1989 ; Ma j ima e t a l . ,
2003) . I t w i l l be o f g rea t impo r tance in subsequen t s tud ie s to
inves t iga te mo re prec ise ly the s t ruc tura l- func t iona l re la t ionsh ip
be tween tendon t issue and bo th mu sc le ﬁbe r type s by app ly ing
d i f fe ren t exe r c ise pro toco l s as we l l as to coup le AFM da ta w i th
whole tendon biomechanical tests .
Collagen I and various proteoglycans contribute to the tensile
strength and viscoelastic properties of the tendon tissue, respectively
(Puxkandl et al., 2002; Robinson et al., 2004). Furthermore, proteogly-
cans and cross-linking enzymes modulate collagen I ﬁbrillogenesis
during rest and training (Kalamajski and Oldberg, 2010; Kwansa et al.,
2014). Therefore, we last examined what effect Tnmd exerts on cross-
linker genes in resting and exercise conditions. Comparison of mRNA
levels of cross-linkers in tendons of WT mice revealed only one signiﬁ-
cant exercise-responder gene - lysyl hydroxylase. In contrast, the ten-
dons of the mutant mice exhibited a very different molecular response
to exercise: namely all genes that were signiﬁcantly downregulated in
Please cite this article as: Dex, S., et al., Tenomodulin is Required for Tendon Endurance Running and Collagen I Fibril Adaptation to Mechanical
Load, EBioMedicine (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2017.05.003
S. Dex et al. / EBioMedicine xxx (2017) xxx–xxx
9
sedentary animals responded by upregulation in the trained. The
expression of the extracellular collagen cross-linker gene Lox was aug-
mented in the KO mice as a result of exercise. Heinemeier et al.
(2007) have shown Lox upregulation in rat tendon with increased load-
ing, which is suggested to potentiate the tendon collagen cross-linking
process. At the protein level, we observed discrepancies in the expres-
sion proﬁle, a phenomenon similar to that seen in the development of
early osteoarthritis in articular cartilage: comparison between osteoar-
thritic versus healthy patients revealed that link protein, among several
other genes, increased 50-fold at the mRNA level compared with only a
three-fold increase at the protein level in the cartilage of diseased
donors (Cs-Szabo et al., 1997). At present, how Tnmd exactly regulates
collagen I ﬁbrillogenesis remains difﬁcult to decipher due to our lack
of understanding of Tnmd signaling pathways. Our data greatly empha-
size the need for future studies to accurately explain the signaling
pathways of this gene protein.
Taken together, our study demonstrates that TNMD/Tnmd, a
mechanosensitive gene, is required for proper tendon tissue adaptation
to endurance running. The data advance our understanding of the
structural-functional relationships of tendon tissues.
Funding Sources
German Research Foundation, D.D. grant Nr. DO1414/3-1.
Conﬂict of Interest
Authors have no conﬂict of interest.
to control, none-mechanically stimulated cells. For enabling fold-upreg-
ulation calculation, the PCR 0 value from the measurement in the con-
trol group was set to 1.
A.2. Immunoﬂuorescence
Immunoﬂuo re scence on human pa te l la , men iscus , tendon
and ﬁb roca r t i lage was pe r fo rmed as desc r ibed in the ma in tex t .
B iops ies from cadaver ic human cart i lage (pate l la) , men iscus and
en thes is ﬁb roca r t i lage we re dono r dona ted to the Ana tomy
Ins t i tu te , LMU , Mun i ch . C ryo - se c t ion s (12 μm th i ck) we re
rehyd ra ted in PBS and immunoﬂuo rescence was ca r r ied w i th
an t ibod ies fo r co l lagen I I and Tnmd w i th ﬁna l nuc lea r , DAP I
coun te rs ta in . Photom ic rog raphs were taken w i th Ax iocam MRm
camera on Observer Z1 microscope (Carl Zeiss) .
A.3. Hematoxilin/Eosin staining
H&E staining was performed on parafﬁn sections of mouse lower
foot as follows: after deparaﬁnization and xylol treatment, re-hydration
in descending alcohol row (100/H2O-50/PBS%) and dH2O wash were
carried out. Hematoxylin solution of 0.1% was applied for 5 min, follow-
ed by intense washing with tap water. Next, slides were rinsed with
dH2O and incubated in 0.1% eosin solution for 5 min. Slides were
dehydrated in ascending ethanol row to 100%, cleared by two xylol
steps and ﬁnally mounted with DPX mounting media (Sigma-Aldrich).
Pictures were taken on an Axiovert 100 microscope using AxioCam
ICc3 color camera (Carl Zeiss).
Author Contributions
A.4. Processing of tissue samples for electron microscopy (EM)
S.D. performed experimental design, voluntary running experi-
ments, collagen cross-linking experiments and wrote the manuscript;
P.A. contributed to experimental design, prepared specimens and
performed H&E stainings of mouse limbs and arranged sections for
AFM experiments; L.W. and W.B. did forced endurance training and
tests and pulmonary examinations and muscle analyses; T.S., S.B. and
H. C-S. provided AFM data; S.M. made available cadaver human tissue
biopsies and contributed with histological interpretation; M.S. carried
out immunogold labelling and EM; A.I. contributed to mechanical stim-
ulation of TSPC; C.S. provided plasmids for luciferase assay; M.S. ap-
proved manuscript; D.D. made project conception and experimental
design, wrote and approved manuscript.
Acknowledgments
D.D. acknowledges the support of the German Research Foundation
(DO1414/3-1). TS, SB and HCS acknowledge the support through the
CANTER research focal point of the Bavarian State Ministry for Science
and Education. The funders were not involved in study design, data
co l lect ion , data ana lys is , interpretat ion and writ ing of the report .
We thank Martina Burggraf for technical assistance in generating data
for Fig. 1.
Appendix A. Supplementary materials and methods
A.1. Semiquantitative PCR
Total RNA from human TSPC was isolated with Qiagen RNeasy Mini
kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). For cDNA synthesis, 1μg total RNA and
AMV First-Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Life technologies) were used.
PCR was performed with Taq DNA Polymerase (Life technologies) in
MGResearch instrument (BioRad, Germany). The conditions for TNMD
and GAPDH PCR are given in Supp. Table 1. PCR bands were quantiﬁed
densitometrically using BioCapt software (Vilber Lourmat, Germany).
Values were normalized to GAPDH and results reported as fold change
Muscle specimens for EM were processed in the Department of Prof.
W. Bloch as described by Wang et al., 2008. Brieﬂy, muscle tissue was
ﬁxed in pre-cooled 4% PFA ON at 4°C. After ﬁxation, specimens were
rinsed 3x10 min in 1 M cacodylate buffer and then treated with 1% ura-
nyl acetate in 70% ethanol for 8 h at 4°C. Biopsies were subsequently
dehydrated in a graded series of ethanol and ﬁnally embedded in
Araldite (Serva, Heidelberg, Germany). Ultrathin sections of 30-60 nm
were cut with an ultramicrotome (Reichert-Leica) with a diamond
knife and placed on copper grids. Transmission electron microscopy
was performed using an electron microscope 902A, Carl Zeiss (Zeiss,
Jena, Germany).
A.5. Voluntary running
Voluntary running behavior was compared between adult Tnmd KO
and WT male mice (six per genotype, n = 6). Study design was ap-
proved by the central animal facility of the Medical faculty of the LMU.
First week mice were acclimatized to the experimental cage containing
a standard free-spinning mouse running wheel (∅ 12 cm) equipped
with speedometer (bike computer 8000 Speedmaster, Sigma-Electro,
Neustadt, Germany). The second and third week each mouse was
placed in the experimental cage, left overnight to voluntarily use the
wheel. This was repeated for 4 consecutive days each week. Running
time and distance were measured, however the technical accuracy of
the wheel/speedometer system was lower compared to the treadmill
apparatuses.
Supp. Table 1
Semiquantitative PCR conditions.
Forward primer
Reverse primer
Size
(bp)
Annealing
Temp (°
C)
TNMD 5´-aagacccgtcacgccagacaag-3´ 5´-ttcacagacgcggcggcaatag-3´ 153
GAPDH 5´-caactacatggtttacatgttc-3´ 5´-gccagtggactccacgac-3´
181
52
50
Please cite this article as: Dex, S., et al., Tenomodulin is Required for Tendon Endurance Running and Collagen I Fibril Adaptation to Mechanical
Load, EBioMedicine (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2017.05.003
10
S. Dex et al. / EBioMedicine xxx (2017) xxx–xxx
Fig. S1. Tnmd expression in human patella, meniscus and enthesis ﬁbrocartilage. Immunoﬂuorescense with anti-collagen II (in red), Tnmd (in green) antibodies and nuclear DAPI (in blue)
counterstain. (a) Central cartilage region of patella, (b) meniscus (low magniﬁcation), (c) enthesis (tendon to ﬁbrocartilage area) (low magniﬁcation), (d) transition zone to patella
tendon, (e) meniscus double-labelled area, (f) ﬁbrocartilage double-labelled area, (g) patella tendon, (h) meniscus area positive only for Tnmd, and (i) tendon area positive only for Tnmd.
Fig. S2. Stacked areas presenting the success rate of both genetypes in pre- and post-exhaustive tests. (a) Stacked area plot and (b) cumulative stacked area in percentage.
Please cite this article as: Dex, S., et al., Tenomodulin is Required for Tendon Endurance Running and Collagen I Fibril Adaptation to Mechanical
Load, EBioMedicine (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2017.05.003
S. Dex et al. / EBioMedicine xxx (2017) xxx–xxx
11
Fig. S3. Representative H&E staining of musculoskeletal elements in Tnmd KO and WT sedentary and trained animals.
Please cite this article as: Dex, S., et al., Tenomodulin is Required for Tendon Endurance Running and Collagen I Fibril Adaptation to Mechanical
Load, EBioMedicine (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2017.05.003
12
S. Dex et al. / EBioMedicine xxx (2017) xxx–xxx
Fig. S4. Gastrocnemius muscle analyses in Tnmd KO and WT trained animals. (a) Perimeter and (b) area of myoﬁbers measured on toluidine blue-stained muscle sections. (c) Tubular
aggregate (TA) count per total (expressed in percentage) myoﬁber area. (d) Light microscopy (arrows depict TA) and (e) electron microscopy (two different magniﬁcations) images of
muscle ultrathin sections of trained Tnmd KO animals.
Fig. S5. Tnmd KO and WT performance in voluntary running tests. (a) Experimental setup of the voluntary running experiment. (b) Timeline: a, 1 week of acclimatization followed by two
weeks of voluntary running, as in each mouse performance was recorded for 4 consecutive nights. (c) Running time and (d) distance covered per night. Bars represent mean ± standard
deviation. Six animal per genotype were tested (n= 6).
Please cite this article as: Dex, S., et al., Tenomodulin is Required for Tendon Endurance Running and Collagen I Fibril Adaptation to Mechanical
Load, EBioMedicine (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2017.05.003
S. Dex et al. / EBioMedicine xxx (2017) xxx–xxx
13
References
Alberton, P., Popov, C., Pragert, M., Kohler, J., Shukunami, C., Schieker, M., Docheva, D.,
2012. Conversion of human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells into ten-
don progenitor cells by ectopic expression of scleraxis. Stem Cells Dev. 21 (6),
846–858.
Alberton, P., Dex, S., Popov, C., Shukunami, C., Schieker, M., Docheva, D., 2015. Loss of
tenomodulin results in reduced self-renewal and augmented senescence of tendon
stem/progenitor cells. Stem Cells Dev. 24 (5), 597–609.
Alexander, R.M., 1991. Elastic mechanisms in primate locomotion. Z. Morphol. Anthropol.
78 (3), 315–320.
Bayer, M.L., Schjerling, P., Herchenhan, A., Zeltz, C., Heinemeier, K.M., Christensen, L.,
Krogsgaard, M., Gullberg, D., Kjaer, M., 2014. Release of tensile strain on engineered
human tendon tissue disturbs cell adhesions, changes matrix architecture, and in-
duces an inﬂammatory phenotype. PLoS One 9 (1), e86078.
Benjamin, M., Ralphs, J.R., 1997. Tendons and ligaments—an overview. Histol. Histopathol.
12 (4), 1135–1144.
Bi, Y., Ehirchiou, D., Kilts, T.M., Inkson, C.A., Embree, M.C., Sonoyama, W., Li, L., Leet, A.I.,
Seo, B.M., Zhang, L., Shi, S., Young, M.F., 2007. Identiﬁcation of tendon stem/progeni-
tor cells and the role of the extracellular matrix in their niche. Nat. Med. 13 (10),
1219–1227.
Boncompagni, S., Protasi, F., Franzini-Armstrong, C., 2012. Sequential stages in the age-de-
pendent gradual formation and accumulation of tubular aggregates in fast twitch
muscle ﬁbers: SERCA and calsequestrin involvement. Age (Dordr.) 34 (1), 27–41.
Brandau, O., Meindl, A., Fassler, R., Aszodi, A., 2001. A novel gene, tendin, is strongly
expressed in tendons and ligaments and shows high homology with
chondromodulin-I. Dev. Dyn. 221 (1), 72–80.
Butt, H.J., Jaschke, M., 1995. Calculation of thermal noise in atomic force microscopy.
Nanotechnology 6, 1–7.
Candiani, G., Riboldi, S.A., Sadr, N., Lorenzoni, S., Neuenschwander, P., Montevecchi, F.M.,
Mantero, S., 2010. Cyclic mechanical stimulation favors myosin heavy chain accumu-
lation in engineered skeletal muscle constructs. J. Appl. Biomater. Biomech. 8 (2),
68–75.
Chakravarti, S., Magnuson, T., Lass, J.H., Jepsen, K.J., LaMantia, C., Carroll, H., 1998. Lumican
regulates collagen ﬁbril assembly: skin fragility and corneal opacity in the absence of
lumican. J. Cell Biol. 141 (5), 1277–1286.
Fig. S6. Cartoon model explaining the physical paradigm of energy stored in stiff versus
soft tendons (ext., extension). The softer the spring, more elastic potential energy can be
stored in the tendon and less restoring force is needed, hence resulting in more
economic running.
Fig. S7. Comparison of protein expression of collagen I cross-linking genes between genotypes and in response to training. Immunoﬂuorescence with asporin, ﬁbromodulin, lumican and
lysyl oxidase antibodies on Achilles tendon sections.
Please cite this article as: Dex, S., et al., Tenomodulin is Required for Tendon Endurance Running and Collagen I Fibril Adaptation to Mechanical
Load, EBioMedicine (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2017.05.003
14
S. Dex et al. / EBioMedicine xxx (2017) xxx–xxx
Couppe, C., Svensson, R.B., Kongsgaard, M., Kovanen, V., Grosset, J.F., Snorgaard, O.,
Bencke, J., Larsen, J.O., Bandholm, T., Christensen, T.M., Boesen, A., Helmark, I.C.,
Aagaard, P., Kjaer, M., Magnusson, S.P., 2016. Human Achilles tendon glycation and
function in diabetes. J. Appl. Physiol. (1985) 120 (2), 130–137.
Cs-Szabo, G., Melching, L.I., Roughley, P.J., Glant, T.T., 1997. Changes in messenger RNA
and protein levels of proteoglycans and link protein in human osteoarthritic cartilage
samples. Arthritis Rheum. 40 (6), 1037–1045.
Dex , S . , L in , D . , Shukunam i , C . , Docheva , D . , 2016 . Tenogen ic modu la t ing ins ider
factor: systematic assessment on the functions of tenomodulin gene. Gene 587
(1), 1–17.
Docheva, D., Hunziker, E.B., Fassler, R., Brandau, O., 2005. Tenomodulin is necessary for
tenocyte proliferation and tendon maturation. Mol. Cell. Biol. 25 (2), 699–705.
Elsalanty, M., Makarov, M., Cherkashin, A., Birch, J., Samchukov, M., 2007. Changes in pen-
nate muscle architecture after gradual tibial lengthening in goats. Anat. Rec. 290 (5),
461–467.
Engel, W.K., Bishop, D.W., Cunningham, G.G., 1970. Tubular aggregates in type II muscle
ﬁbers: ultrastructural and histochemical correlation. J. Ultrastruct. Res. 31 (5–6),
507–525.
Franchi, M., Fini, M., Quaranta, M., De Pasquale, V., Raspanti, M., Giavaresi, G., Ottani, V.,
Ruggeri, A., 2007. Crimp morphology in relaxed and stretched rat Achilles tendon.
J. Anat. 210 (1), 1–7.
Galloway, M.T., Lalley, A.L., Shearn, J.T., 2013. The role of mechanical loading in tendon de-
velopment, maintenance, injury, and repair. J. Bone Joint Surg. Am. 95 (17),
1620–1628.
Gronau, T., Kruger, K., Prein, C., Aszodi, A., Gronau, I., Iozzo, R.V., Mooren, F.C., Clausen-
Schaumann, H., Bertrand, J., Pap, T., Bruckner, P., Dreier, R., 2017. Forced exercise-in-
duced osteoarthritis is attenuated in mice lacking the small leucine-rich proteoglycan
decorin. Ann. Rheum. Dis. 76 (2) 442–229.
Hannukainen, J., Kalliokoski, K.K., Nuutila, P., Fujimoto, T., Kemppainen, J., Viljanen, T.,
Laaksonen, M.S., Parkkola, R., Knuuti, J., Kjaer, M., 2005. In vivo measurements of glu-
cose uptake in human Achilles tendon during different exercise intensities. Int.
J. Sports Med. 26 (9), 727–731.
Heinemeier, K.M., Kjaer, M., 2011. In vivo investigation of tendon responses to mechanical
loading. J. Musculoskelet. Neuronal Interact. 11 (2), 115–123.
Heinemeier, K.M., Olesen, J.L., Haddad, F., Langberg, H., Kjaer, M., Baldwin, K.M., Schjerling,
P., 2007. Expression of collagen and related growth factors in rat tendon and skeletal
muscle in response to speciﬁc contraction types. J. Physiol. 582 (Pt 3), 1303–1316.
Itaya, T., Kagami, H., Okada, K., Yamawaki, A., Narita, Y., Inoue, M., Sumita, Y., Ueda, M.,
2009. Characteristic changes of periodontal ligament-derived cells during passage.
J. Periodontal Res. 44 (4), 425–433.
Jelinsky, S.A., Archambault, J., Li, L., Seeherman, H., 2010. Tendon-selective genes identi-
ﬁed from rat and human musculoskeletal tissues. J. Orthop. Res. 28 (3), 289–297.
Kalamajski, S., Oldberg, A., 2010. The role of small leucine-rich proteoglycans in collagen
ﬁbrillogenesis. Matrix Biol. 29 (4), 248–253.
Kamper, M., Hamann, N., Prein, C., Clausen-Schaumann, H., Farkas, Z., Aszodi, A., Niehoff,
A., Paulsson, M., Zaucke, F., 2016. Early changes in morphology, bone mineral density
and matrix composition of vertebrae lead to disc degeneration in aged collagen IX−/
− mice. Matrix Biol. 49, 132–143.
Khoshgoftar, M., van Donkelaar, C.C., Ito, K., 2011. Mechanical stimulation to stimulate
formation of a physiological collagen architecture in tissue-engineered cartilage: a
numerical study. Comput. Methods Biomech. Biomed. Eng. 14 (2), 135–144.
Kimura, N., Shukunami, C., Hakuno, D., Yoshioka, M., Miura, S., Docheva, D., Kimura, T.,
Okada, Y., Matsumura, G., Shin'oka, T., Yozu, R., Kobayashi, J., Ishibashi-Ueda, H.,
Hiraki, Y., Fukuda, K., 2008. Local tenomodulin absence, angiogenesis, and matrix me-
talloproteinase activation are associated with the rupture of the chordae tendineae
cordis. Circulation 118 (17), 1737–1747.
Kohler, J., Popov, C., Klotz, B., Alberton, P., Prall, W.C., Haasters, F., Muller-Deubert, S.,
Ebert, R., Klein-Hitpass, L., Jakob, F., Schieker, M., Docheva, D., 2013. Uncovering the
cellular and molecular changes in tendon stem/progenitor cells attributed to tendon
aging and degeneration. Aging Cell 12 (6), 988–999.
Koskinen, S.O., Heinemeier, K.M., Olesen, J.L., Langberg, H., Kjaer, M., 2004. Physical exer-
cise can inﬂuence local levels of matrix metalloproteinases and their inhibitors in ten-
don-related connective tissue. J. Appl. Physiol. (1985) 96 (3), 861–864.
Koteja, P., Swallow, J.G., Carter, P.A., Garland Jr., T., 1999. Energy cost of wheel running in
house mice: implications for coadaptation of locomotion and energy budgets. Physiol.
Biochem. Zool. 72 (2), 238–249.
Kubo, K., Kanehisa, H., Ito , M., Fukunaga, T., 2001a. Effects of isometric training on
the elasticity of human tendon structures in vivo. J. Appl. Physiol. (1985) 91 (1),
26–32.
Kubo, K., Kanehisa, H., Kawakami, Y., Fukanaga, T., 2001b. Growth changes in the elastic
properties of human tendon structures. Int. J. Sports Med. 22 (2), 138–143.
Kubo, K., Kanehisa, H., Kawakami , Y., Fukunaga, T. , 2001c. Effects of repeated muscle
contractions on the tendon structures in humans. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 84 (1–2),
162–166.
Kubo, K., Miyazaki, D., Shimoju, S., Tsunoda, N., 2015. Relationship between elastic prop-
erties of tendon structures and performance in long distance runners. Eur. J. Appl.
Physiol. 115 (8), 1725–1733.
Kwansa, A.L., De Vita, R., Freeman, J.W., 2014. Mechanical recruitment of N- and C-
crosslinks in collagen type I. Matrix Biol. 34, 161–169.
Kyriakides, T.R., Zhu, Y.H., Smith, L.T., Bain, S.D., Yang, Z., Lin, M.T., Danielson, K.G., Iozzo,
R.V., LaMarca, M., McKinney, C.E., Ginns, E.I., Bornstein, P., 1998. Mice that lack
thrombospondin 2 display connective tissue abnormalities that are associated with
disordered collagen ﬁbrillogenesis, an increased vascular density, and a bleeding di-
athesis. J. Cell Biol. 140 (2), 419–430.
Langberg, H., Bulow, J., Kjaer, M., 1998. Blood ﬂow in the peritendinous space of the
human Achilles tendon during exercise. Acta Physiol. Scand. 163 (2), 149–153.
Langberg, H., Skovgaard, D., Asp, S., Kjaer, M., 2000. Time pattern of exercise-induced
changes in type I collagen turnover after prolonged endurance exercise in humans.
Calcif. Tissue Int. 67 (1), 41–44.
Lerman, I., Harrison, B.C., Freeman, K., Hewett, T.E., Allen, D.L., Robbins, J., Leinwand, L.A.,
2002. Genetic variability in forced and voluntary endurance exercise performance in
seven inbred mouse strains. J. Appl. Physiol. 92 (6), 2245–2255.
Lightfoot, J.T., 2011. Current understanding of the genetic basis for physical activity.
J. Nutr. 141 (3), 526–530.
Maeda , T . , Sakabe , T . , Sunaga , A . , Saka i , K . , R ivera , A .L . , Keene , D .R . , Sasak i , T . ,
Stavnezer, E., Iannotti, J., Schweitzer, R., Ilic, D., Baskaran, H., Sakai, T., 2011. Con-
version of mechanical force into TGF-beta-mediated biochemical signals . Curr.
Biol . 21 (11), 933–941.
Majima, T., Yasuda, K., Tsuchida, T., Tanaka, K., Miyakawa, K., Minami, A., Hayashi, K.,
2003. Stress shielding of patellar tendon: effect on small-diameter collagen ﬁbrils in
a rabbit model. J. Orthop. Sci. 8 (6), 836–841.
Mazzocca, A.D., Chowaniec, D., McCarthy, M.B., Beitzel, K., Cote, M.P., McKinnon, W.,
Arciero, R., 2011. In vitro changes in human tenocyte cultures obtained from proxi-
mal biceps tendon: multiple passages result in changes in routine cell markers.
Knee Surg. Sports Traumatol. Arthrosc.
Michna, H., 1984. Morphometric analysis of loading-induced changes in collagen-ﬁbril
populations in young tendons. Cell Tissue Res. 236 (2), 465–470.
Michna, H., Hartmann, G., 1989. Adaptation of tendon collagen to exercise. Int. Orthop. 13
(3), 161–165.
Morgan-Hughes, J.A., 1998. Tubular aggregates in skeletal muscle: their functional signif-
icance and mechanisms of pathogenesis. Curr. Opin. Neurol. 11 (5), 439–442.
Morse, D.L., Gillies, R.J., 2010. Molecular imaging and targeted therapies. Biochem.
Pharmacol. 80 (5), 731–738.
Ooi, C.C., Schneider, M.E., Malliaras, P., Counsel, P., Connell, D.A., 2015. Prevalence of mor-
phological and mechanical stiffness alterations of mid Achilles tendons in asymptom-
atic marathon runners before and after a competition. Skelet. Radiol. 44 (8),
1119–1127.
Oshima, Y., Shukunami, C., Honda, J., Nishida, K., Tashiro, F., Miyazaki, J., Hiraki, Y., Tano, Y.,
2003. Expression and localization of tenomodulin, a transmembrane type
chondromodulin-I-related angiogenesis inhibitor, in mouse eyes. Invest. Ophthalmol.
Vis. Sci. 44 (5), 1814–1823.
Palomares, K.T., Gleason, R.E., Mason, Z.D., Cullinane, D.M., Einhorn, T.A., Gerstenfeld, L.C.,
Morgan, E.F., 2009. Mechanical stimulation alters tissue differentiation and molecular
expression during bone healing. J. Orthop. Res. 27 (9), 1123–1132.
Pavlovicova, M., Novotova, M., Zahradnik, I., 2003. Structure and composition of tubular
aggregates of skeletal muscle ﬁbres. Gen. Physiol. Biophys. 22 (4), 425–440.
Pennisi, E., 2002. Tending tender tendons. Science 295 (5557), 1011.
Popov, C., Burggraf, M., Kreja, L., Ignatius, A., Schieker, M., Docheva, D., 2015. Mechanical
stimulation of human tendon stem/progenitor cells results in upregulation of matrix
proteins, integrins and MMPs, and activation of p38 and ERK1/2 kinases. BMC Mol.
Biol. 16, 6.
Prein, C., Warmbold, N., Farkas, Z., Schieker, M., Aszodi, A., Clausen-Schaumann, H., 2016.
Structural and mechanical properties of the proliferative zone of the developing mu-
rine growth plate cartilage assessed by atomic force microscopy. Matrix Biol. 50,
1–15.
Puxkandl, R., Zizak, I., Paris, O., Keckes, J., Tesch, W., Bernstorff, S., Purslow, P., Fratzl,
P., 2002. Viscoelastic properties of collagen: synchrotron radiation investigations
and struc tura l mode l . Ph i los . Trans . R . Soc . Lond . Ser . B B io l . Sc i . 357 (1418) ,
191–197.
Reeves, N.D., 2006. Adaptation of the tendon to mechanical usage. J. Musculoskelet. Neu-
ronal Interact. 6 (2), 174–180.
Robinson, P.S., Lin, T.W., Reynolds, P.R., Derwin, K.A., Iozzo, R.V., Soslowsky, L.J., 2004.
Strain-rate sensitive mechanical properties of tendon fascicles from mice with genet-
ically engineered alterations in collagen and decorin. J. Biomech. Eng. 126 (2),
252–257.
Shadwick, R.E., 1990. Elastic energy storage in tendons: mechanical differences related to
function and age. J. Appl. Physiol. (1985) 68 (3), 1033–1040.
Shukunami, C., Oshima, Y., Hiraki, Y., 2001. Molecular cloning of tenomodulin, a novel
chondromodulin-I related gene. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 280 (5),
1323–1327.
Stolz, M., Gottardi, R., Raiteri, R., Miot, S., Martin, I., Imer, R., Staufer, U., Raducanu, A.,
Düggelin, M., Baschong, W., Daniels, A.U., Friederich, N.F., Aszodi, A., Aebi, U., 2009.
Early detection of aging cartilage and osteoarthritis in mice and patient samples
using atomic force microscopy. Nat. Nanotechnol. 4 (3), 186–192.
Svensson, R.B., Heinemeier, K.M., Couppe, C., Kjaer, M., Magnusson, S.P., 2016. Effect of
aging and exercise on the tendon. J. Appl. Physiol. (1985) 121 (6), 1353–1362.
Takimoto, A., Kawatsu, M., Yoshimoto, Y., Kawamoto, T., Seiryu, M., Takano-Yamamoto, T.,
Hiraki, Y., Shukunami, C., 2015. Scleraxis and osterix antagonistically regulate tensile
force-responsive remodeling of the periodontal ligament and alveolar bone. Develop-
ment 142 (4), 787–796.
Vilarta, R., Vidal Bde, C., 1989. Anisotropic and biomechanical properties of tendons mod-
iﬁed by exercise and denervation: aggregation and macromolecular order in collagen
bundles. Matrix 9 (1), 55–61.
Wang, H.V., Chang, L.W., Brixius, K., Wickstrom, S.A., Montanez, E., Thievessen, I.,
Schwander, M., Muller, U., Bloch, W., Mayer, U., Fassler, R., 2008. Integrin-linked ki-
nase stabilizes myotendinous junctions and protects muscle from stress-induced
damage. J. Cell Biol. 180 (5), 1037–1049.
Wood, L.K., Brooks, S.V., 2016. Ten weeks of treadmill running decreases stiffness and in-
creases collagen turnover in tendons of old mice. J. Orthop. Res. 43 (2), 346–353.
Yang, G., Im, H.J., Wang, J.H., 2005. Repetitive mechanical stretching modulates IL-1beta
induced COX-2, MMP-1 expression, and PGE2 production in human patellar tendon
ﬁbroblasts. Gene 363, 166–172.
Please cite this article as: Dex, S., et al., Tenomodulin is Required for Tendon Endurance Running and Collagen I Fibril Adaptation to Mechanical
Load, EBioMedicine (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2017.05.003
S. Dex et al. / EBioMedicine xxx (2017) xxx–xxx
15
Yeowell, H.N., Walker, L.C., 2000. Mutations in the lysyl hydroxylase 1 gene that result in
enzyme deﬁciency and the clinical phenotype of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type VI.
Mol. Genet. Metab. 71 (1–2), 212–224.
Zhang, J., Wang, J.H., 2010. Mechanobiological response of tendon stem cells: implications
of tendon homeostasis and pathogenesis of tendinopathy. J. Orthop. Res. 28 (5),
639–643.
Zhang, G., Ezura, Y., Chervoneva, I., Robinson, P.S., Beason, D.P., Carine, E.T., Soslowsky, L.J.,
Iozzo, R.V., Birk, D.E., 2006. Decorin regulates assembly of collagen ﬁbrils and acqui-
sition of biomechanical properties during tendon development. J. Cell Biochem. 98
(6), 1436–1449.
Please cite this article as: Dex, S., et al., Tenomodulin is Required for Tendon Endurance Running and Collagen I Fibril Adaptation to Mechanical
Load, EBioMedicine (2017), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2017.05.003
