Biomaterials 31 (2010) 6952e6958
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Biomaterials
j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / b i o m a t e r i a l s
The regulation of phenotype of cultured tenocytes by microgrooved
surface structure
Ji Zhu a,1, Jie Li a,1, Bin Wang a, Wen Jie Zhang a, b, Guangdong Zhou a, b, Yilin Cao a, b, Wei Liu a, b, *
a Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Shanghai 9th People’s Hospital, Shanghai Tissue Engineering Key Laboratory, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine,
639 Zhi Zao Ju Rd, Shanghai, 200011, China
b National Tissue Engineering Center of China, Shanghai, China
a r t i c l e i n f o
a b s t r a c t
Article history:
Received 4 May 2010
Accepted 23 May 2010
Available online 19 June 2010
Keywords:
Tenocytes
Elongated morphology
RhoA/ROCK
Tenomodulin
Y27632
LPA
To maintain or enhance cell function by controlling its shape is an important consideration in scaffold
design. Tenocyte is characterized by its unique elongated cell shape and the role remains unexplored. In
this study, primary porcine tenocytes of newborn pigs were cultured respectively on culture dish (Group
A), smooth (Group B) or microgroove silicone membrane (Group C, enforcing an elongated morphology)
to observe the effect of cell shape on tenocyte phenotype. The results showed that elongated morphology
(Group C) could help in vitro passaged tenocytes to retain their phenotype and function by maintaining
the expression of tenomodulin (tenocyte marker) and collagen I (functional molecule). By contrast, the
spread tenocytes (Groups A and B) lost or signiﬁcantly reduced the expression of tenomodulin or
collagen I respectively. Interestingly, the lost tenomodulin expression of Group B cells could be regained
after being switched to microgroove culture condition of Group C. In addition, signiﬁcantly increased
RhoA-ATP level and reduced ROCK activity were found associated with elongated morphology and
artiﬁcially activating RhoA or inhibiting ROCK could lead to increased tenomodulin expression in spread
cells. Collectively, these results conﬁrm that elongated morphology is essential for tenocytes to keep
their phenotype and function and can redifferentiate the dedifferentiated tenocytes by the participation
of RhoA/ROCK signaling, and these ﬁndings may provide insight into the design of advanced scaffold for
tendon engineering.
Ó 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
As the key component of
tissue engineering, scaffold is
conventionally thought to simply provide an environment allowing
cells to grow, produce extracellular matrices and form tissue, in
which scaffold does not play a decisive role unless chemical
molecules are integrated into the scaffold to guide biological
behavior of seeded cells. However, recent studies demonstrated
that physical characters of a material such as matrix elasticity can
actually signiﬁcantly affect the biological behavior of seeded cells
[1]. It was also observed that geometric cue mediated cell control is
able to direct mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) differentiation [2].
The interrelationship between cell shape and its function is one
of the important subjects of cell biology study [3]. In musculoskel-
etal and connective tissues, there are different types of cells which
exhibit different cell morphologies and serve different functions. For
example, osteoblasts and chondrocytes have cuboidal cell shape,
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: liuwei_2000@yahoo.com (W. Liu).
1 These authors contributed equally.
0142-9612/$ e see front matter Ó 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.biomaterials.2010.05.058
while fat cells have a round cell shape. Importantly, the special cell
shapes allow cells to perform special functions. It has been observed
that adipogenic differentiation of MSC required spread morphology,
whereas narrow cell shape is needed for MSC osteogenic differen-
tiation [2]. Furthermore, cell function change also comes with cell
morphology change. For example, bone marrow stromal cells with
ﬁbroblast-like shapes began to exhibit polygon shape after chon-
drogenic induction [4]. Also, endothelial progenitor cells with
spindle morphology can be switched to cobblestone cell shape after
endothelial differentiation [5].
In vivo niche might be an important factor that determines
special cell morphology inside a speciﬁc tissue type. As an example,
tendon is one type of special connective tissue that carries out the
function of transmitting mechanical force form muscle to bone. To
meet this functional requirement, collagen ﬁbers are aligned
longitudinally along with the axis of mechanical forces, and thus
the tenocytes constrained within the narrow space between the
ﬁbers exhibit elongated morphology [6]. However,
it remains
unclear whether the elongated cell morphology is essential for
tenocyte function and phenotype maintenance when tenocytes are
deprived of their in vivo niche.
J. Zhu et al. / Biomaterials 31 (2010) 6952e6958
6953
Tenocytes or tendon ﬁbroblasts are one type of ﬁbroblasts,
a common term for describing mesenchymal cells that mainly
perform tissue supporting function in different musculoskeletal
and connective tissues. It has been difﬁcult for a long time to
characterize this cell type because of no speciﬁc marker available.
Fortunately, recent researches demonstrated that tenomodulin
(Tnmd), a member of a new family of type II transmembrane
glycoproteins, is predominantly expressed in dense connective
tissue like tendon and ligament, and can serve as a differentiation
marker for mature tenocytes [7,8]. In addition, deletion of teno-
modulin gene could to a certain extent affect tendon development
[9]. Thus, these results make a speciﬁc tenocyte marker molecule
available, which can serve as a tool to investigate the interrela-
tionship between the elongated cell morphology of tenocytes and
their phenotype and function. Additionally, RhoA/ROCK signaling
pathway has been shown a major signaling pathway for cell shape
mediated regulation of cell function [10e12].
Based on these phenomena, we would like to hypothesize that
tenocyte phenotype and function can be better maintained during
in vitro cultured by mimicking their original in vivo morphology, i.e.
an elongated form; and RhoA/ROCK (Rho-associated kinase)
pathway is likely to play a role in regulating this process. In this
study, dedifferentiation with phenotype and functional loss were
observed in cultured and spread tenocytes with a worsening trend
along with prolonged culture time. By contrast, forcing tenocytes in
an elongated form can prevent phenotype and functional loss of
cultured tenocytes or even restored the lost phenotype by
switching spread to elongated morphology, and reduced ROCK
activity plays an important role.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Cell culture
Newborn pigs were purchased from Shanghai Agricultural Institute. An Insti-
tutional Review Committee of Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine
approved all animal study protocols. Porcine primary tenocytes were isolated from
toe ﬂexor tendons. Brieﬂy, ﬂexor tendons were harvested from newborn pigs and
adjacent tissues were stripped. After thorough wash in phosphate-buffered saline
(PBS) and soaking in 2.5% chloramphenicol solution for 10 min, the tendons were
washed again in PBS and then were minced aseptically followed by enzyme diges-
tion with 0.2% collagenase II (Worthington, Freehold, NJ) in Dulbecco’s Modiﬁed
Eagle Medium (DMEM) at 37  C on a rotator as previously described [13,14]. The
resulting cell suspension harvested at 4 h post-digestion was ﬁltered through
a sterile nylon mesh (Tetko, Elmsford, N.J.) to remove tissue residues. The ﬁltrate was
further centrifuged and cell pellets were washed with PBS and then resuspended in
DMEM culture medium containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), L-glutamine
(292 mg/ml), penicillin (100 U/ml), streptomycin (100 mg/ml), and ascorbic acid
(50 mg/ml). The cell suspension was transferred to a culture dish (5  105/cm2) and
cultured at 37  C in a humidiﬁed 5% CO2 atmosphere. When cultured cells reached
80% conﬂuence,
they were detached with 0.25% trypsin and 0.05% ethyl-
enediaminetetraacetic acid and subcultured at the same density (5  105/cm2) until
second passages.
University of Pittsburgh [15], was employed for the study. As reported [15], the
membrane surfaces were micro-fabricated to create parallel microgrooves with
10 mm ridge and groove width and 3 mm groove depth. Meanwhile, smooth silicone
membranes were used as a control and both types of membranes were coated with
10 ng/ml ﬁbronectin (Roche, Indianapolis, IN) to promote cell attachment.
2.3. Experimental design
To determine the effect of cell shape on tenomodulin and collagen I expression
and its potential mechanism, regularly cultured tenocytes of the second passages
were further divided into four different groups for culturing under different
conditions. Group A: on regular 100-mm culture dishes for another 4 or 5 passages;
Group B: on smooth silicone membrane for another 4 or 5 passages; Group C: on
microgroove silicone membrane for another 4 or 5 passages; Group D: on smooth
silicone membrane for 3 passages and then part of cells were transferred to
microgroove membrane for another 2 passages and part of cells were cultured
continuously for another 2 passages on the smooth membrane. All cells were
examined for their cell shapes and structures 48 h after cell attachment with H&E
staining and F-actin staining. After 4 or 5 passages of cell culture, all cells grown on
different substrata were collected for RT-PCR and quantitative PCR analyses of
various gene expression, and assessment of RhoA activation and ROCK activity.
2.4. RT-PCR analysis
The designed primers for PCR analysis were listed in Table 1. The cDNA was
ampliﬁed by RT-PCR (Taq-polymerase, TaKaRa, Japan). PCR was performed with
incubation at 95  C for 5 min followed by 29 cycles (30 s at 95  C, 30 s at annealing
temperatures listed in Table 1 and 45 s at 72  C) and terminated by 10 min extension
at 72  C and stored at 4  C until analysis. PCR products were separated using a 1.5%
agarose gel in TAE buffer containing ethidium bromide and subsequently photo-
graphed under UV light. b-actin or GAPDH gene was used as an internal control.
Experiment was repeated in three tissue samples.
2.5. Quantitative PCR analysis
For quantitative PCR, cDNA was ampliﬁed using a Power SYBR Green PCR master
mix (2) (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) in a real-time thermal cycler (Stra-
tagene Mx3000PTM QPCR System, La Jolla, CA). Quantitative PCRs (qPCRs) were
conducted in triplicate for each sample. Gene expression was normalized to GAPDH
 ΔΔC(t) method [16]. Experiment was repeated in three
expression by using the 2
tissue samples.
2.6. H&E staining
Porcine tenocytes were cultured on coverslips, smooth silicone membrane,
microgroove silicone membrane for 48 h. The cells were ﬁxed with 4% para-
formaldehyde in PBS for 15 min and stained with H&E.
2.7. F-actin staining
To observe the effect of cell shape or drug treatment on actin organization, 48 h
after incubation on three different stratum, or 24 h after treatment with lysophos-
phatidic acid (LPA) or Y27632, cells were ﬁxed with 4% paraformaldehyde in phos-
phate buffer for 10 min, and permeabilized with 0.5% Triton X-100 in phosphate
buffer for 5 min. The cells were then incubated in rhodamine phalloidin (100 nM,
cytoskeleton, Denver, CO) for 30 min, and nuclei were counterstained with 40 6-
diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) (100 nM, Sigma, St. Louis, MO) for 30 s.
2.8. RhoA activation assay and ROCK activity
2.2. Microgroove membrane as a cell culture substrate
To enforce an elongated morphology of cultured tenocytes, previously reported
microgroove silicone membrane, a gift kindly provided by Dr. James Wang from
Levels of GTP-bound RhoA were determined in tenocytes cultured under three
different conditions for 4 passages with the G-LISAÔ activation kit (Cytoskeleton,
Denver, CO) according to the manufacturer’s instructions as previously reported
[17,18]. The signal was read by measuring absorbance at 490 nm using a microplate
Table 1
Primers used in RT-PCR and quantitative PCR analysis.
Primer sequence (50 e30 )
Gene
Tenomodulin
Collagen I
b-actin
GAPDH
Sense: CCAGAGGAAGAAATAGATGAGAATG
Antisense: CACTGGTAGGAAAGTGAAGATCTTC
Sense: GATCCTGCTGACGTGGCCAT
Antisense: ACTCGTGCAGCCGTCGTAGA
Sense: CCAAGGCCAACCGTGAGAAGATGAC
Antisense: AGGGTACATGGTGGTCCCGCCAGAC
Sense: GGTCACCAGGGCTGCTTT
Antisense: CTTGACTGTGCCGTGGAAT
Annealing temperature
( C)
58
55
58
58
Product size
(bp)
228
222
592
133
6954
J. Zhu et al. / Biomaterials 31 (2010) 6952e6958
reader (Beckman Coulter, Fullerton, CA). Accordingly, to measure ROCK activity of
porcine tenocytes cultured under the three different conditions for 4 passages, the
Rho-kinase Assay Kit (MBL International, Woburn, MA) was used according to the
manufacturer’s instructions as previously reported [19,20]. Tetramethylbenzidine
was used as a substrate, and the signal was read by measuring absorbance at
450 nm. Experiment was repeated in three tissue samples.
2.9. The effect of ROCK inhibition or RhoA activation on tenomodulin expression
For ROCK inhibition assay, cells were ﬁrst grown on regular dishes, serum-
starved for 24 h, then treated with ROCK inhibitor Y27632 (10 mm, sigma) [21] in
serum-free condition for different times, or treated with different doses of Y27632
for 24 h followed by Real-time PCR analysis and F-actin staining. Then the cells were
grown on three different substrata for 2 days and serum-starved for 24 h, treated
with 10 mm Y27632 for 24 h followed by Real-time PCR assay. Similarly, for activation
assay, cells were grown on three different substrata for 2 days and serum-starved for
24 h, and then treated with LPA (1 mg/ml, Sigma) [22,23] in serum-free medium for
24 h followed by Real-time PCR assay and actin staining of group A cells. Experiment
was repeated in three tissue samples.
2.10. Statistical analysis
Results are presented as means  standard deviation. The differences among
different groups were analyzed using one-way ANOVA test. When the analysis of
variance indicated signiﬁcance in the difference among data, multiple comparisons
were performed with NewmaneKeuls post hoc tests. A p-value of less than 0.05 was
considered statistically signiﬁcant.
3. Results
decreased with cell passage (Fig. 1b and d), suggesting a close
relationship between cell morphology and cell function.
3.2. Cell morphology and tenomodulin gene expression
To further conﬁrm whether cell morphology could regulate
tenomodulin expression, cells were incubated on three different
substrata for total 4 passages. As shown in Fig. 2a, Group C cells
(cultured on microgroove membrane) could maintain an elongated
morphology even after 4 passages as revealed by light microscopy
and H&E staining (Fig. 2a). By contrast, cells of Groups A and B
(Fig. 2a) remained spread after 4 passages. It was noted that
enforced elongation also reorganized the actin stress ﬁbers longi-
tudinally along with the cell axis (Fig. 2a). Importantly, both RT-PCR
and quantitative PCR analyses revealed that the tenomodulin
expression was continuously decreased in spread cells (Groups A
and B) along with cell passage; however, the expression could be
well maintained in the cells with enforced elongation (Group C),
which was signiﬁcantly higher than that of the other two groups
(Fig. 2b and c). Moreover, elongated cell morphology could also
maintain a higher expression level of collagen I in the cells of Group
C than in the cells of Groups A and B (Fig. 2d and e) when examined
at passage 4. These results indicate that elongated cell shape may
play a dominant role in determining the phenotype and function of
in vitro cultured tenocytes.
3.1. Tenocyte cultrue and the gene expression of tenomodulin and
collagen I
3.3. Redifferentiation of dedifferentiated tenocytes by elongated
morphology
During in vitro cell culture, tenocytes lost their characteristic
elongated cell morphology with cell passages and became spread in
their shape (Fig. 1a). Interestingly, the mRNA expression of tenocyte
marker molecule tenomodulin was markedly reduced and lost after
6 and 10 passages during in vitro culture as revealed by RT-PCR and
Real-time PCR analyses (Fig. 1b and c). Importantly, the expression
of the major functional molecule type I collagen also sharply
In this part of study, cells were ﬁrst passaged three times on
different substrata to allow for dedifferentiation of the cells in
groups A and B, and then the possibility of redifferentiation was
investigated by switching from Group B to Group D. As shown in
Fig. 3, one passage after switching the culture condition (P3 þ P1),
the tenomodulin expression level of switched cells (Group D cells)
remained low and equivalent to that of non-switched cells (Group B
Fig. 1. In vitro cultured porcine tenocytes lost their native morphology and phenotype. Cells grown on culture dish became spread in their morphology from passage 2 to passage 10
(a) and exhibited decreased gene expression level of tenomodulin (Tnmd, b, c) and collagen I (Col-I, b, d) revealed by RT-PCR (b) and quantitative PCR (c, d). The symbol “*” indicates
p < 0.05 and “P” represents cell passage.
J. Zhu et al. / Biomaterials 31 (2010) 6952e6958
6955
Fig. 2. Passaged tenocytes with enforced elongated morphology retained high expression level of tenomodulin (Tnmd) and collagen I (Col-1). Cells were passaged respectively on
culture dish (Group A), smooth silicone membrane (Group B) and microgroove silicone membrane (Group C) to observe the morphology (a, passage 4 cell, 100) and to examine the
gene expression levels of Tnmd (b, c) and Col-1 (d, e) by RT-PCR (b, d) and quantitative PCR (c, e). P and A, B, C respectively represent cell passage and Groups A, B and C. The symbol
“*” indicates p < 0.05.
cells) with no signiﬁcant difference (Fig. 3, left). After one more
passage of cell culture (P3 þ P2), tenomodulin expression level
continued to drop in Group B cells, whereas the expression level of
Group D cells signiﬁcantly increased and reached a level similar to
that of Group C cells that were forced to be elongated all the time
Fig. 3. Redifferentiation of dedifferentiated cultured tenocytes by morphological
switch from spread to elongated shape. Group B cells were passaged on smooth sili-
cone membrane 3 times and part of cells was then switched to microgroove membrane
for another two passage (Group D). Quantitative PCR revealed the re-expression of
Tnmd in Group D cells after two passages in enforced elongated morphology. P and A,
B, C and D respectively represent cell passage and Groups A, B, C and D. The symbol “*”
indicates p < 0.05.
with no signiﬁcant difference (Fig. 3, right). This phenomenon
indicates that dedifferentiated tenocytes during in vitro culture
could restore their phenotype after regaining their native cell
morphology.
3.4. Effect of cell morphology on RhoA/ROCK activity
To understand the potential role of RhoA/ROCK signaling in cell
shape mediated tenomodulin expression, both RhoA and ROCK
activities were examined for the cells that were continually grown
on different substrata. As shown in Fig. 4, the level of GTP-bound
RhoA was signiﬁcantly increased in the cells with elongated shape
(Group C) than the cells with spread morphology (Groups A and B)
(Fig. 4a). By contrast, the ROCK activity was signiﬁcantly decreased
in the cells with elongated shape (Group C) than the cells with
spread morphology (Groups A and B) (Fig. 4b), indicating that
elongated cell morphology leads to enhanced RhoA activation and
decreased ROCK activity.
3.5. Effects of ROCK inhibitor Y27632 on tenomodulin expression
To investigate whether manipulation of ROCK activity will affect
tenomodulin expression, cells were ﬁrst treated with ROCK inhib-
itor Y27632 to observe the effect on cell morphology. As shown in
Fig. 5, cells cultured on regular culture dishes remained largely
spread in their morphology after 24 h of treatment with 10 mM
Y27632, although attenuated stress ﬁber structure was observed in
treated group than in non-treated group (Fig. 5a). Interestingly,
inhibition of ROCK activity could enhance tenomodulin expression
6956
J. Zhu et al. / Biomaterials 31 (2010) 6952e6958
expression was slightly increased in Group C cells with elongated
morphology (p < 0.05), suggesting that the artiﬁcial inhibition with
Y27632 will probably have limited effect on the elongated cells that
already had a very low level of ROCK activity and thus was not able
to further majorly enhance tenomodulin expression.
3.6. Effects of RhoA activator LPA on tenomodulin expression
To investigate the effect of artiﬁcial RhoA activation on teno-
modulin expression, cells grown on different substrata were
treated with LPA to observe the effect. As shown in Fig. 6, activation
of RhoA could signiﬁcantly down regulate tenomodulin expression
levels of the cells (Groups A and B) with spread cell morphology,
whereas no signiﬁcant decrease of tenomodulin expression level
was found in Group C cells grown on microgroove membrane
(Fig. 6b), indicating that LPA treatment will have limited effect on
the elongated cells that already had a high level of GTP-bound RhoA
and thus was not able to further decrease tenomodulin expression.
In addition, after LPA treatment of the cells grown on regular
culture dishes, enhanced actin stress ﬁber formation was observed
(Fig. 6a), suggesting that RhoA activity may affect tenomodulin
expression that is not entirely dependent on cell morphology.
4. Discussion
Cell dedifferentiation is a common biological process when cells
were deprived of their in vivo niche longer enough. For example,
bovine articular chondrocytes became dedifferentiated after being
cultured in monolayer for three weeks and lost the expression of
marker molecule collagen II [24]. It has been proposed that multiple
factors constitute an in vivo niche that maintains the phenotype of
chondrocytes, such as cartilage matrices,
low oxygen, growth
Fig. 4. Effect of cell morphology on RhoA and ROCK activity. The level of GTP-bound
RhoA was signiﬁcantly higher in the cells with elongated morphology than in the cells
with spread morphology (a), whereas the ROCK activity was signiﬁcantly lower in
elongated cells than in spread cells (b). A signiﬁcant difference in RhoA-GPT level and
Rock activity was found as well between Groups A and B cells (both spread). A, B and C
represent respectively Groups A, B and C, and the symbol “*” indicates p < 0.05.
with a dose-dependent and a time-dependent manner (Fig. 5b and
c), indicating that ROCK activity could exert an active effect on
regulating tenomodulin expression. Next, the effect was also
investigated on the cells cultured on different substrata. As shown
in Fig. 5d, inhibiting ROCK activity with 10 mM Y27632 treatment
could signiﬁcantly enhanced the tenomodulin expression in the
cells of both Groups A and B (p < 0.05), which were in spread cell
morphology. Particularly, there was a dramatic increase of the
expression level in Group B cells after the treatment, leading to
a level similar to that of Group C cells without signiﬁcant difference
(p > 0.05). However, after Y27632 treatment,
tenomodulin
Fig. 5. Effect of ROCK inhibitor on tenomodulin (Tnmd) expression in tenocytes cultured on different substrata. Treatment of cells grown on culture dish with Y27632 led to
attenuated stress ﬁber structure without obvious morphological change (a, 100) and reduced Tnmd expression in dose (b) and time (c) dependent manners. Dramatic upregulation
of Tnmd was observed in Group B cells comparing to control group (Ctrl) after Y27632 treatment with a level similar to that of Group C. Minor upregulation was also observed in
Group C cells. A, B and C represent respectively Groups A, B and C, and the symbol “*” indicates p < 0.05.
J. Zhu et al. / Biomaterials 31 (2010) 6952e6958
6957
Fig. 6. Effect of RhoA activator on tenomodulin (Tnmd) expression in tenocytes cultured on different substrata. Treatment of the cells grown on culture dish with LPA did not
obviously change the morphology (a, 100), but signiﬁcantly reduced Tnmd expression (b). The treatment also signiﬁcantly reduced tenomodulin expression in the cells grown on
smooth silicone membrane but not in the cells on microgroove membrane comparing to control groups (Ctrl) (b). A, B and C represent respectively Groups A, B and C. The symbol “*”
indicates p < 0.05.
factors and three dimensional structure and thus are the potential
factors to be used to redifferentiate the dedifferentiated con-
drocytes during in vitro culture [24e27].
Among these factors, the role of cell morphology in cell dedif-
ferentiation might be an important subject to investigate because
cell morphology change often accompanies with dedifferentiation
[24] and induced differentiation of stem cell [4]. Tenocyte is one type
of ﬁbroblasts, which can be an interesting target to study the
interrelationship between cell morphology and phenotype, because
tenocyte exhibits a unique elongated form in vivo. As shown in this
study, loss of this particular cell morphology during in vitro culture is
associated with the loss of cell phenotype and function as the
expression level of marker molecule (tenomodulin) and functional
molecule (collagen I) signiﬁcantly decreased (Fig. 1). However, the
results demonstrated that simply forcing cells into an elongated
morphology without other environmental alterations could prevent
in vitro cultured kenocytes from dedifferentiation even after 4 cell
passages (Fig. 2). Interestingly, simply switching the morphology
from spread shape to elongated form could reverse dedifferentiation
status and redifferentiate cultured tenocytes by restoring tenomo-
dulin and collagen I expression (Fig. 3). This ﬁnding suggests that cell
morphology change may not just be a passive response to cell
dedifferentiation [24] or stem cell differentiation [4], rather envi-
ronmentally induced cell morphology change may actually play an
active role in directing the fate of cell dedifferentiation or rediffer-
entiation for in vitro cultured cells.
Cytoskeleton structure is important for cell shape maintenance.
As demonstrated in this study by F-actin staining, enforced elon-
gated cell morphology could reorganize actin stress ﬁbers from
random distribution (spread cells) to longitudinally alignment
along with elongated cell axis (Fig. 2a), which may lead to reduced
cytoskeleton tension in narrow shaped tenocytes [28]. Further-
more, the altered cytoskeleton pattern also altered the RhoA acti-
vation level and ROCK activity. As shown in Fig. 4, elongated cell
morphology led to increased level of GTP-bound RhoA and
decreased ROCK activity. Although the observed decoupling of
RhoA activation and the activity of its effector ROCK in elongated
tenocytes was not expected, it is not unprecedented. Previous
researches suggest the presence of a negative-feedback loop that
occurs following Rho-dependent formation of focal adhesions
[22,29]. As reported previously [28], cytoskeletal
tension is
required to couple RhoA to ROCK. As examples, the decoupling of
RhoA and ROCK is evident in suspended, spreading-restricted or
cytoskeletal tension disrupted cells, which all exhibited high levels
of Rho-GTP but low ROCK activity [28,30e32]. In this case, reduced
cytoskeletal tension by enforced narrow cell shape (spreading-
restricted morphology) is likely to cause the decoupling.
More importantly, the decoupled RhoA/ROCK activity could
actively regulated tenomodulin expression. As shown in this study,
artiﬁcial inhibition of ROCK activity with Y27632 treatment could
enhance tenomodulin expression even treated cells remained
largely in spread morphology despite actin stress ﬁbers were dis-
rupted to a certain level. Reversely, artiﬁcial activation of RhoA by
LPA treatment could lead to reduced tenomodulin expression with
enhanced actin stress ﬁber structure. In contrast, for elongated cells
that already exhibited highly activated RhoA or low level ROCK
activity, treatment with either LPA or Y27632 could not majorly
change the expression level of tenomodulin. These ﬁndings indi-
cate that RhoA/ROCK signaling participates and play an active role
in cell shape mediated tenocyte dedifferentiation and rediffer-
entiation processes.
In this study, difference in tenomodulin expression and RhoA/
ROCK activity remained observable between Group A and Group B
cells, although both group cells exhibit spread cell morphology. The
difference is likely to be caused by different substrata because the
culture dishes may allow for better cell attachment and spreading
compared to silicone membrane. In addition, Scleraxis is known
important for regulating tenomodulin expression during tendon
development [8,33]. However, change of cell morphology during in
vitro culture and cell passage did not seem to affect scleraxis
expression despite signiﬁcantly reduced tenomodulin expression
in mouse tenocytes during in vitro culture (data not shown), sug-
gesting that cell shape regulated tenomodulin expression in teno-
cytes may not depend on scleraxis based regulation, which may
play its primary role in tendon development.
Although this study dealt with basic cell biology issue, the
ﬁnding of this study may provide a guide for practical application.
As an example, our previous studies shown elongated tenocyte
morphology in tissue engineered tendon [34,35], the design of
a linear structure may help to fabricate a scaffold material that may
allow seeded tenocytes to keep an elongated morphology during
in vitro and in vivo tendon formation, and thus to optimize the
tissue quality and function of tissue engineered tendon by well
preserved phenotype and function of seeded tenocytes. Addition-
ally, speciﬁc morphological requirement for tenocyte phenotype
and function revealed by this study may provide insight into
tenogenic differentiation of stem cells [2].
5. Conclusion
This study demonstrated that tenocytes underwent dediffer-
entiation during in vitro culture along with morphology change
from elongated to spread and simply maintaining the cultured
tenocytes in an elongated form could retain their phenotype or
6958
J. Zhu et al. / Biomaterials 31 (2010) 6952e6958
even reverse dedifferentiated status towards redifferentiated status
and reduced ROCK activity contribute to this unique phenomenon.
In the future, deﬁning the detailed process of RhoA/ROCK mediated
tenomodulin expression such as transcriptional regulation may
help to reveal the mechanism. Moreover, these ﬁndings may
provide insight into the design of an advanced scaffold for tendon
engineering, which is able to maintain or strengthen the function of
seeded tenocytes or able to efﬁciently induce tenogenic differen-
tiation of seeded mesenchymal stem cells.
Acknowledgments
This study was supported by National “973” Project Foundation
2005CB522703. The authors thank Dr. James H-C. Wang for the
supply of silicone membrane.
Appendix
Figures with essential colour discrimination. Figs. 1,2,5 and 6 are
difﬁcult to interpret in black and white. The full colour images can
be found in the on-line version, at doi:10.1016/j.biomaterials.2010.
05.058.
References
[1] Engler AJ, Sen S, Sweeney HL, Discher DE. Matrix elasticity directs stem cell
lineage speciﬁcation. Cell 2006;126:677e89.
[2] Kilian Kristopher A. Geometric cues for directing the differentiation of
mesenchymal stem cells. PNAS 2010;107:4872e7.
[3] McBeath R, Pirone DM, Nelson CM, Bhadriraju K, Chen CS. Cell shape, cyto-
skeletal tension, and RhoA regulate stem cell lineage commitment. Dev Cell
2004;6:483e95.
[4] Zhou G, Liu W, Cui L, Wang X, Liu T, Cao Y. Repair of porcine articular
osteochondral defects in non-weightbearing areas with autologous bone
marrow stromal cells. Tissue Eng 2006;12:3209e21.
[5] Asahara T, Murohara T, Sullivan A, Silver M, van der Zee R, Li T, et al. Isolation of
putative progenitor endothelial cells for angiogenesis. Science 1997;275:964e7.
[6] McNeilly CM, Banes AJ, Benjamin M, Ralphs JR. Tendon cells in vivo form
a three dimensional network of cell processes linked by gap junctions. J Anat
1996;189(Pt 3):593e600.
[7] Shukunami C, Oshima Y, Hiraki Y. Molecular cloning of tenomodulin, a novel
chondromodulin-I
related
gene.
Biochem Biophys
Res
Commun
2001;280:1323e7.
[8] Shukunami C, Takimoto A, Oro M, Hiraki Y. Scleraxis positively regulates the
expression of tenomodulin, a differentiation marker of tenocytes. Dev Biol
2006;298:234e47.
[9] Docheva D, Hunziker EB, Fässler R, Brandau O. Tenomodulin is necessary for
tenocyte
proliferation
and
tendon maturation. Mol
Cell
Biol
2005;25:699e705.
[10] Takai Y, Sasaki T, Tanaka K, Nakanishi H. Rho as a regulator of the cytoskel-
eton. Trends Biochem Sci 1995;20:227e31.
[11] Leung T, Chen XQ, Manser E, Lim L. The p160 RhoA-binding kinase ROK alpha
is a member of a kinase family and is involved in the reorganization of the
cytoskeleton. Mol Cell Biol 1996;16:5313e27.
[12] Maekawa M, Ishizaki T, Boku S, Watanabe N, Fujita A, Iwamatsu A, et al.
Signaling from Rho to the actin cytoskeleton through protein kinases ROCK
and LIM-kinase. Science 1999;285:895e8.
[13] Liu W, Chen B, Deng D, Xu F, Cui L, Cao Y. Repair of tendon defect with
dermal ﬁbroblast engineered tendon in a porcine model. Tissue Eng
2006;12:775e88.
[14] Wang B, Liu W, Zhang Y, Jiang Y, Zhang WJ, Zhou G, et al. Engineering of
extensor
tendon complex by
an ex
vivo approach. Biomaterials
2008;29:2954e61.
[15] Thampatty BP, Wang JH. A new approach to study ﬁbroblast migration. Cell
Motil Cytoskeleton 2007;64:1e5.
[16] Livak KJ, Schmittgen TD. Analysis of relative gene expression data using
 ΔΔCT method. Methods 2001;25:
real-time quantitative PCR and the 2
402e8.
[17] Woods A, Beier F. RhoA/ROCK signaling regulates chondrogenesis in
a context-dependent manner. J Biol Chem 2006;281:13134e40.
[18] Rieken S, Herroeder S, Sassmann A, Wallenwein B, Moers A, Offermanns S,
et al. Lysophospholipids control integrin-dependent adhesion in splenic B
cells through G(i) and G(12)/G(13) family G-proteins but not through G(q)/G
(11). J Biol Chem 2006;281:36985e92.
[19] Madonna R, Di Napoli P, Massaro M, Grilli A, Felaco M, De Caterina A, et al.
Simvastatin attenuates expression of cytokine-inducible nitric-oxide synthase
in embryonic cardiac myoblasts. J Biol Chem 2005;280:13503e11.
[20] Sapet C, Simoncini S, Loriod B, Puthier D, Sampol J, Nguyen C, et al. Throm-
bin-induced endothelial microparticle generation: identiﬁcation of a novel
pathway involving ROCK-II activation by caspase-2. Blood 2006;108:
1868e76.
[21] Kaunas R, Nguyen P, Usami S, Chien S. Cooperative effects of Rho and
mechanical stretch on stress ﬁber organization. Proc Natl Acad Sci
2005;102:15895e900.
[22] Ren XD, Kiosses WB, Schwartz MA. Regulation of the small GTP-binding
protein Rho by cell adhesion and the cytoskeleton. EMBO J 1999;18:578e85.
[23] Li Y, Gonzalez MI, Meinkoth JL, Field J, Kazanietz MG, Tennekoon GI. Lyso-
phosphatidic acid promotes survival and differentiation of rat Schwann cells. J
Biol Chem 2003;278:9585e91.
[24] Domm C, Schünke M, Christesen K, Kurz B. Redifferentiation of dediffer-
entiated bovine articular chondrocytes in alginate culture under low oxygen
tension. Osteoarthr Cartil 2002;10:13e22.
[25] Malda J, van Blitterswijk CA, van Geffen M, Martens DE, Tramper J, Riesle J.
Low oxygen tension stimulates the redifferentiation of dedifferentiated adult
human nasal chondrocytes. Osteoarthr Cartil 2004;12:306e13.
[26] Bonaventure J, Kadhom N, Cohen-Solal L, Ng KH, Bourguignon J, Lasselin C,
et al. Reexpression of cartilage-speciﬁc genes by dedifferentiated human
articular chondrocytes cultured in alginate beads. Exp Cell Res 1994;212:
97e104.
[27] Lemare F, Steimberg N, Le Griel C, Demignot S, Adolphe M. Dedifferentiated
chondrocytes cultured in alginate beads: restoration of the differentiated
phenotype and of the metabolic responses to interleukin-1beta. J Cell Physiol
1998;176:303e13.
[28] Bhadriraju K, Yang M, Alom Ruiz S, Pirone D, Tan J, Chen CS. Activation of
ROCK by RhoA is regulated by cell adhesion, shape, and cytoskeletal tension.
Exp Cell Res 2007;313:3616e23.
[29] Wozniak MA, Desai R, Solski PA, Der CJ, Keely PJ. ROCK-generated contractility
regulates breast epithelial cell differentiation in response to the physical
properties of a three-dimensional collagen matrix.
J Cell Biol 2003;163:
583e95.
[30] Huang S, Chen CS, Ingber DE. Control of cyclin D1, p27(Kip1), and cell cycle
progression in human capillary endothelial cells by cell shape and cytoskeletal
tension. Mol Biol Cell 1998;9:3179e93.
[31] Ren XD, Wang R, Li Q, Kahek LA, Kaibuchi K, Clark RA. Disruption of Rho signal
transduction upon cell detachment. J Cell Sci 2004;117:3511e8.
[32] Kreisberg JI, Venkatachalam MA, Radnik RA, Patel PY. Role of myosin light-
chain phosphorylation and microtubules in stress ﬁber morphology in
cultured mesangial cells. Am J Physiol 1985;249:F227e35.
[33] Schweitzer R, Chyung JH, Murtaugh LC, Brent AE, Rosen V, Olson EN, et al.
Analysis of the tendon cell fate using Scleraxis, a speciﬁc marker for tendons
and ligaments. Development 2001;128:3855e66.
[34] Cao Y, Liu Y, Liu W, Shan Q, Buonocore SD, Cui L. Bridging tendon defects using
autologous tenocyte engineered tendon in a hen model. Plast Reconstr Surg
2002;110:1280e9.
[35] Cao D, Liu W, Wei X, Xu F, Cui L, Cao Y. In vitro tendon engineering with avain
tenocytes and polyglycolic acids: a preliminary report. Tissue Eng
2006;12:1369e77.
